The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Well at the World's End: A Tale
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Well at the World's End: A Tale

Author: William Morris


        
Release date: October 1, 1994 [eBook #169]
                Most recently updated: March 31, 2025

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/169

Credits: Produced by John Hamm.  HTML version by Al Haines.


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WELL AT THE WORLD'S END: A TALE ***




The Well at the World's End


by

William Morris




Table of Contents


BOOK ONE  The Road Unto Love

Chapter

   1  The Sundering of the Ways
   2  Ralph Goeth Back Home to the High House
   3  Ralph Cometh to the Cheaping-Town
   4  Ralph Rideth the Downs
   5  Ralph Cometh to Higham-on-the-Way
   6  Ralph Goeth His Ways From the Abbey of St. Mary at Higham
   7  The Maiden of Bourton Abbas
   8  Ralph Cometh to the Wood Perilous.  An Adventure Therein
   9  Another Adventure in the Wood Perilous
  10  A Meeting and a Parting in the Wood Perilous
  11  Now Must Ralph Ride For It
  12  Ralph Entereth Into the Burg of the Four Friths
  13  The Streets of the Burg of the Four Friths
  14  What Ralph Heard of the Matters of the Burg of the Four Friths
  15  How Ralph Departed From the Burg of the Four Friths
  16  Ralph Rideth the Wood Perilous Again
  17  Ralph Cometh to the House of Abundance
  18  Of Ralph in the Castle of Abundance
  19  Ralph Readeth in a Book Concerning the Well at the World's End
  20  Ralph Meeteth a Man in the Wood
  21  Ralph Weareth Away Three Days Uneasily
  22  An Adventure in the Wood
  23  The Leechcraft of the Lady
  24  Supper and Slumber in the Woodland Hall



BOOK TWO  The Road Unto Trouble

   1  Ralph Meets With Love in the Wilderness
   2  They Break Their Fast in the Wildwood
   3  The Lady Telleth Ralph of the Past Days of Her Life
   4  The Lady Tells of Her Deliverance
   5  Yet More of the Lady's Story
   6  The Lady Tells Somewhat of Her Doings After She Left the Wilderness
   7  The Lady Tells of the Strife and Trouble That Befell After Her Coming
   8  The Lady Maketh an End of Her Tale
   9  They Go On Their Way Once More
  10  Of the Desert-House and the Chamber of Love in the Wilderness
  11  Ralph Cometh Out of the Wilderness
  12  Ralph Falleth in With Friends and Rideth to Whitwall
  13  Richard Talketh With Ralph Concerning the Well at the World's End.
  14  Ralph Falleth in With Another Old Friend
  15  Ralph Dreams a Dream Or Sees a Vision
  16  Of the Tales of Swevenham
  17  Richard Bringeth Tidings of Departing
  18  Ralph Departeth From Whitwall With the Fellowship of Clement Chapman
  19  Master Clement Tells Ralph Concerning the Lands Whereunto They Were
  20  They Come to the Mid-Mountain Guest-House
  21  A Battle in the Mountains
  22  Ralph Talks With Bull Shockhead
  23  Of the Town of Cheaping Knowe
  24  Ralph Heareth More Tidings of the Damsel
  25  The Fellowship Comes to Whiteness
  26  They Ride the Mountains Toward Goldburg
  27  Clement Tells of Goldburg
  28  Now They Come to Goldburg
  29  Of Goldburg and the Queen Thereof
  30  Ralph Hath Hope of Tidings Concerning the Well at the World's End
  31  The Beginning of the Road To Utterbol
  32  Ralph Happens on Evil Days
  33  Ralph is Brought on the Road Towards Utterbol
  34  The Lord of Utterbol Will Wot of Ralph's Might and Minstrelsy
  35  Ralph Cometh To the Vale of the Tower
  36  The Talk of Two Women Concerning Ralph
  37  How Ralph Justed With the Aliens
  38  A Friend Gives Ralph Warning
  39  The Lord of Utterbol Makes Ralph a Free Man
  40  They Ride Toward Utterness From Out of Vale Turris
  41  Redhead Keeps Tryst


BOOK THREE  The Road To The Well At World's End.

   1  An Adventure in the Wood Under the Mountains
   2  Ralph Rides the Wood Under the Mountains
   3  Ralph Meeteth With Another Adventure in the Wood Under the Mountain
   4  They Ride the Wood Under the Mountains
   5  They Come on the Sage of Swevenham
   6  Those Two Are Learned Lore by the Sage of Swevenham
   7  An Adventure by the Way
   8  They Come to the Sea of Molten Rocks
   9  They Come Forth From the Rock-Sea
  10  They Come to the Gate of the Mountains
  11  They Come to the Vale of Sweet Chestnuts
  12  Winter Amidst of the Mountains
  13  Of Ursula and the Bear
  14  Now Come the Messengers of the Innocent Folk
  15  They Come to the Land of the Innocent Folk
  16  They Come to the House of the Sorceress
  17  They Come Through the Woodland to the Thirsty Desert
  18  They Come to the Dry Tree
  19  They Come Out of the Thirsty Desert
  20  They Come to the Ocean Sea
  21  Now They Drink of the Well at the World's End
  22  Now They Have Drunk and Are Glad


BOOK FOUR  The Road Home

   1  Ralph and Ursula Come Back Again Through the Great Mountains
   2  They Hear New Tidings of Utterbol
   3  They Winter With the Sage; and Thereafter Come Again to Vale Turris
   4  A Feast in the Red Pavilion
   5  Bull Telleth of His Winning of the Lordship of Utterbol
   6  They Ride From Vale Turris.  Redhead Tells of Agatha
   7  Of Their Riding the Waste, and of a Battle Thereon
   8  Of Goldburg Again, and the Queen Thereof
   9  They Come to Cheaping Knowe Once More.  Of the King Thereof
  10  An Adventure on the Way to the Mountains
  11  They Come Through the Mountains Into the Plain
  12  The Roads Sunder Again
  13  They Come to Whitwall Again
  14  They Ride Away From Whitwall
  15  A Strange Meeting in the Wilderness
  16  They Come to the Castle of Abundance Once More
  17  They Fall in With That Hermit
  18  A Change of Days in the Burg of the Four Friths
  19  Ralph Sees Hampton and the Scaur
  20  They Come to the Gate of Higham By the Way
  21  Talk Between Those Two Brethren
  22  An Old Acquaintance Comes From the Down Country to See Ralph
  23  They Ride to Bear Castle
  24  The Folkmote of the Shepherds
  25  They Come to Wulstead
  26  Ralph Sees His Father and Mother Again
  27  Ralph Holds Converse With Katherine His Gossip
  28  Dame Katherine Tells of the Pair of Beads, and Whence She Had Them
  29  They Go Down to Battle in Upmeads
  30  Ralph Brings His Father and Mother to Upmeads
  31  Ralph Brings Ursula Home to the High House
  32  Yet a Few Words Concerning Ralph of Upmeads




BOOK ONE

The Road Unto Love



CHAPTER 1

The Sundering of the Ways


Long ago there was a little land, over which ruled a regulus or
kinglet, who was called King Peter, though his kingdom was but little.
He had four sons whose names were Blaise, Hugh, Gregory and Ralph: of
these Ralph was the youngest, whereas he was but of twenty winters and
one; and Blaise was the oldest and had seen thirty winters.

Now it came to this at last, that to these young men the kingdom of
their father seemed strait; and they longed to see the ways of other
men, and to strive for life.  For though they were king's sons, they
had but little world's wealth; save and except good meat and drink, and
enough or too much thereof; house-room of the best; friends to be merry
with, and maidens to kiss, and these also as good as might be; freedom
withal to come and go as they would; the heavens above them, the earth
to bear them up, and the meadows and acres, the woods and fair streams,
and the little hills of Upmeads, for that was the name of their country
and the kingdom of King Peter.

So having nought but this little they longed for much; and that the
more because, king's sons as they were, they had but scant dominion
save over their horses and dogs: for the men of that country were
stubborn and sturdy vavassors, and might not away with masterful
doings, but were like to pay back a blow with a blow, and a foul word
with a buffet.  So that, all things considered, it was little wonder if
King Peter's sons found themselves straitened in their little land:
wherein was no great merchant city; no mighty castle, or noble abbey of
monks:  nought but fair little halls of yeomen, with here and there a
franklin's court or a shield-knight's manor-house; with many a goodly
church, and whiles a house of good canons, who knew not the road to
Rome, nor how to find the door of the Chancellor's house.

So these young men wearied their father and mother a long while with
telling them of their weariness, and their longing to be gone: till at
last on a fair and hot afternoon of June King Peter rose up from the
carpet which the Prior of St. John's by the Bridge had given him (for
he had been sleeping thereon amidst the grass of his orchard after his
dinner) and he went into the hall of his house, which was called the
High House of Upmeads, and sent for his four sons to come to him.  And
they came and stood before his high-seat and he said:

"Sons, ye have long wearied me with words concerning your longing for
travel on the roads; now if ye verily wish to be gone, tell me when
would ye take your departure if ye had your choice?"

They looked at one another, and the three younger ones nodded at Blaise
the eldest:  so he began, and said:  "Saving the love and honour that
we have for thee, and also for our mother, we would be gone at once,
even with the noon's meat still in our bellies.  But thou art the lord
in this land, and thou must rule.  Have I said well, brethren?"  And
they all said "Yea, yea." Then said the king; "Good! now is the sun
high and hot; yet if ye ride softly ye may come to some good harbour
before nightfall without foundering your horses.  So come ye in an
hour's space to the Four-want-way, and there and then will I order your
departure."

The young men were full of joy when they heard his word; and they
departed and went this way and that, gathering such small matters as
each deemed that he needed, and which he might lightly carry with him;
then they armed themselves, and would bid the squires bring them their
horses; but men told them that the said squires had gone their ways
already to the Want-way by the king's commandment: so thither they went
at once a-foot all four in company, laughing and talking together
merrily.

It must be told that this Want-way aforesaid was but four furlongs from
the House, which lay in an ingle of the river called Upmeads Water
amongst very fair meadows at the end of the upland tillage; and the
land sloped gently up toward the hill-country and the unseen mountains
on the north; but to the south was a low ridge which ran along the
water, as it wound along from west to east.  Beyond the said ridge, at
a place whence you could see the higher hills to the south, that
stretched mainly east and west also, there was presently an end of the
Kingdom of Upmeads, though the neighbours on that side were peaceable
and friendly, and were wont to send gifts to King Peter.  But toward
the north beyond the Want-way King Peter was lord over a good stretch
of land, and that of the best; yet was he never a rich man, for he had
no freedom to tax and tail his folk, nor forsooth would he have used it
if he had; for he was no ill man, but kindly and of measure.  On these
northern marches there was war at whiles, whereas they ended in a great
forest well furnished of trees; and this wood was debateable, and King
Peter and his sons rode therein at their peril: but great plenty was
therein of all wild deer, as hart, and buck, and roe, and swine, and
bears and wolves withal.  The lord on the other side thereof was a
mightier man than King Peter, albeit he was a bishop, and a baron of
Holy Church.  To say sooth he was a close-fist and a manslayer; though
he did his manslaying through his vicars, the knights and men-at-arms
who held their manors of him, or whom he waged.

In that forest had King Peter's father died in battle, and his eldest
son also; therefore, being a man of peace, he rode therein but seldom,
though his sons, the three eldest of them, had both ridden therein and
ran therefrom valiantly.  As for Ralph the youngest, his father would
not have him ride the Wood Debateable as yet.

So came those young men to the Want-ways, and found their father
sitting there on a heap of stones, and over against him eight horses,
four destriers, and four hackneys, and four squires withal.  So they
came and stood before their father, waiting for his word, and wondering
what it would be.

Now spake King Peter:  "Fair sons, ye would go on all adventure to seek
a wider land, and a more stirring life than ye may get of me at home:
so be it!  But I have bethought me, that, since I am growing old and
past the age of getting children, one of you, my sons, must abide at
home to cherish me and your mother, and to lead our carles in war if
trouble falleth upon us.  Now I know not how to choose by mine own wit
which of you shall ride and which abide.  For so it is that ye are
diverse of your conditions; but the evil conditions which one of you
lacks the other hath, and the valiancy which one hath, the other lacks.
Blaise is wise and prudent, but no great man of his hands.  Hugh is a
stout rider and lifter, but headstrong and foolhardy, and over
bounteous a skinker; and Gregory is courteous and many worded, but
sluggish in deed; though I will not call him a dastard.  As for Ralph,
he is fair to look on, and peradventure he may be as wise as Blaise, as
valiant as Hugh, and as smooth-tongued as Gregory; but of all this we
know little or nothing, whereas he is but young and untried.  Yet may
he do better than you others, and I deem that he will do so.  All
things considered, then, I say, I know not how to choose between you,
my sons; so let luck choose for me, and ye shall draw cuts for your
roads; and he that draweth longest shall go north, and the next longest
shall go east, and the third straw shall send the drawer west; but as
to him who draweth the shortest cut, he shall go no whither but back
again to my house, there to abide with me the chances and changes of
life; and it is most like that this one shall sit in my chair when I am
gone, and be called King of Upmeads.

"Now, my sons, doth this ordinance please you?  For if so be it doth
not, then may ye all abide at home, and eat of my meat, and drink of my
cup, but little chided either for sloth or misdoing, even as it hath
been aforetime."

The young men looked at one another, and Blaise answered and said:
"Sir, as for me I say we will do after your commandment, to take what
road luck may show us, or to turn back home again." They all yeasaid
this one after the other; and then King Peter said: "Now before I draw
the cuts, I shall tell you that I have appointed the squires to go with
each one of you.  Richard the Red shall go with Blaise; for though he
be somewhat stricken in years, and wise, yet is he a fierce carle and a
doughty, and knoweth well all feats of arms.

"Lancelot Longtongue shall be squire to Hugh; for he is good of seeming
and can compass all courtesy, and knoweth logic (though it be of the
law and not of the schools), yet is he a proper man of his hands; as
needs must he be who followeth Hugh; for where is Hugh, there is
trouble and debate.

"Clement the Black shall serve Gregory:  for he is a careful carle, and
speaketh one word to every ten deeds that he doeth; whether they be
done with point and edge, or with the hammer in the smithy.

"Lastly, I have none left to follow thee, Ralph, save Nicholas
Longshanks; but though he hath more words than I have, yet hath he more
wisdom, and is a man lettered and far-travelled, and loveth our house
right well.

"How say ye, sons, is this to your liking?"

They all said "yea."  Then quoth the king; "Nicholas, bring hither the
straws ready dight, and I will give them my sons to draw."

So each young man came up in turn and drew; and King Peter laid the
straws together and looked at them, and said:

"Thus it is, Hugh goeth north with Lancelot, Gregory westward with
Clement." He stayed a moment and then said:  "Blaise fareth eastward
and Richard with him.  As for thee, Ralph my dear son, thou shalt back
with me and abide in my house and I shall see thee day by day; and thou
shalt help me to live my last years happily in all honour; and thy love
shall be my hope, and thy valiancy my stay."

Therewith he arose and threw his arm about the young man's neck; but he
shrank away a little from his father, and his face grew troubled; and
King Peter noted that, and his countenance fell, and he said:

"Nay nay, my son; grudge not thy brethren the chances of the road, and
the ill-hap of the battle.  Here at least for thee is the bounteous
board and the full cup, and the love of kindred and well-willers, and
the fellowship of the folk.  O well is thee, my son, and happy shalt
thou be!"

But the young man knit his brows and said no word in answer.

Then came forward those three brethren who were to fare at all
adventure, and they stood before the old man saying nought.  Then he
laughed and said: "O ho, my sons!  Here in Upmeads have ye all ye need
without money, but when ye fare in the outlands ye need money; is it
not a lack of yours that your pouches be bare?  Abide, for I have seen
to it."

Therewith he drew out of his pouch three little bags, and said; "Take
ye each one of these; for therein is all that my treasury may shed as
now.  In each of these is there coined money, both white and red, and
some deal of gold uncoined, and of rings and brooches a few, and by
estimation there is in each bag the same value reckoned in lawful
silver of Upmeads and the Wolds and the Overhill-Countries. Take up
each what there is, and do the best ye may therewith."

Then each took his bag, and kissed and embraced his father; and they
kissed Ralph and each other, and so got to horse and departed with
their squires, going softly because of the hot sun.  But Nicholas
slowly mounted his hackney and led Ralph's war-horse with him home
again to King Peter's House.



CHAPTER 2

Ralph Goeth Back Home to the High House


Ralph and King Peter walked slowly home together, and as they went King
Peter fell to telling of how in his young days he rode in the Wood
Debateable, and was belated there all alone, and happed upon men who
were outlaws and wolfheads, and feared for his life; but they treated
him kindly, and honoured him, and saw him safe on his way in the
morning.  So that never thereafter would he be art and part with those
who hunted outlaws to slay them.  "For," said he, "it is with these men
as with others, that they make prey of folk; yet these for the more
part prey on the rich, and the lawful prey on the poor.  Otherwise it
is with these wolfheads as with lords and knights and franklins, that
as there be bad amongst them, so also there be good; and the good ones
I happed on, and so may another man."

Hereto paid Ralph little heed at that time, since he had heard the tale
and its morality before, and that more than once; and moreover his mind
was set upon his own matters and these was he pondering.  Albeit
perchance the words abode with him.  So came they to the House, and
Ralph's mother, who was a noble dame, and well-liking as for her years,
which were but little over fifty, stood in the hall-door to see which
of her sons should come back to her, and when she saw them coming
together, she went up to them, and cast her arms about Ralph and kissed
him and caressed him--being exceeding glad that it was he and not one
of the others who had returned to dwell with them; for he was her
best-beloved, as was little marvel, seeing that he was by far the
fairest and the most loving.  But Ralph's face grew troubled again in
his mother's arms, for he loved her exceeding well; and forsooth he
loved the whole house and all that dwelt there, down to the turnspit
dogs in the chimney ingle, and the swallows that nested in the earthen
bottles, which when he was little he had seen his mother put up in the
eaves of the out-bowers: but now, love or no love, the spur was in his
side, and he must needs hasten as fate would have him.  However, when
he had disentangled himself from his mother's caresses, he enforced
himself to keep a cheerful countenance, and upheld it the whole evening
through, and was by seeming merry at supper, and went to bed singing.



CHAPTER 3

Ralph Cometh to the Cheaping-Town


He slept in an upper chamber in a turret of the House, which chamber
was his own, and none might meddle with it.  There the next day he
awoke in the dawning, and arose and clad himself, and took his wargear
and his sword and spear, and bore all away without doors to the side of
the Ford in that ingle of the river, and laid it for a while in a
little willow copse, so that no chance-comer might see it; then he went
back to the stable of the House and took his destrier from the stall
(it was a dapple-grey horse called Falcon, and was right good,) and
brought him down to the said willow copse, and tied him to a tree till
he had armed himself amongst the willows, whence he came forth
presently as brisk-looking and likely a man-at-arms as you might see on
a summer day.  Then he clomb up into the saddle, and went his ways
splashing across the ford, before the sun had arisen, while the
throstle-cocks were yet amidst their first song.

Then he rode on a little trot south away; and by then the sun was up he
was without the bounds of Upmeads; albeit in the land thereabout dwelt
none who were not friends to King Peter and his sons: and that was
well, for now were folk stirring and were abroad in the fields; as a
band of carles going with their scythes to the hay-field; or a maiden
with her milking-pails going to her kine, barefoot through the seeding
grass; or a company of noisy little lads on their way to the nearest
pool of the stream that they might bathe in the warm morning after the
warm night.  All these and more knew him and his armour and Falcon his
horse, and gave him the sele of the day, and he was nowise troubled at
meeting them; for besides that they thought it no wonder to meet one of
the lords of Upmeads going armed about his errands, their own errands
were close at home, and it was little likely that they should go that
day so far as to Upmeads Water, seeing that it ran through the meadows
a half-score miles to the north-ward.

So Ralph rode on, and came into the high road, that led one way back
again into Upmeads, and crossed the Water by a fair bridge late builded
between King Peter and a house of Canons on the north side, and the
other way into a good cheaping-town hight Wulstead, beyond which Ralph
knew little of the world which lay to the south, and seemed to him a
wondrous place, full of fair things and marvellous adventures.

So he rode till he came into the town when the fair morning was still
young, the first mass over, and maids gathered about the fountain
amidst the market-place, and two or three dames sitting under the
buttercross.  Ralph rode straight up to the house of a man whom he
knew, and had often given him guesting there, and he himself was not
seldom seen in the High House of Upmeads.  This man was a merchant, who
went and came betwixt men's houses, and bought and sold many things
needful and pleasant to folk, and King Peter dealt with him much and
often.  Now he stood in the door of his house, which was new and
goodly, sniffing the sweet scents which the morning wind bore into the
town; he was clad in a goodly long gown of grey welted with silver, of
thin cloth meet for the summer-tide: for little he wrought with his
hands, but much with his tongue; he was a man of forty summers,
ruddy-faced and black-bearded, and he was called Clement Chapman.

When he saw Ralph he smiled kindly on him, and came and held his
stirrup as he lighted down, and said:  "Welcome, lord!  Art thou come
to give me a message, and eat and drink in a poor huckster's house, and
thou armed so gallantly?"

Ralph laughed merrily, for he was hungry, and he said: "Yea, I will eat
and drink with thee and kiss my gossip, and go my ways."

Therewith the carle led him into the house; and if it were goodly
without, within it was better.  For there was a fair chamber panelled
with wainscot well carven, and a cupboard of no sorry vessels of silver
and latten: the chairs and stools as fair as might be; no king's might
be better: the windows were glazed, and there were flowers and knots
and posies in them; and the bed was hung with goodly web from over sea
such as the soldan useth.  Also, whereas the chapman's ware-bowers were
hard by the chamber, there was a pleasant mingled smell therefrom
floating about.  The table was set with meat and drink and vessel of
pewter and earth, all fair and good; and thereby stood the chapman's
wife, a very goodly woman of two-score years, who had held Ralph at the
font when she was a slim damsel new wedded; for she was come of no mean
kindred of the Kingdom of Upmeads: her name was Dame Katherine.

Now she kissed Ralph's cheek friendly, and said: "Welcome, gossip! thou
art here in good time to break thy fast; and we will give thee a trim
dinner thereafter, when thou hast been here and there in the town and
done thine errand; and then shalt thou drink a cup and sing me a song,
and so home again in the cool of the evening."

Ralph seemed a little troubled at her word, and he said: "Nay, gossip,
though I thank thee for all these good things as though I had them, yet
must I ride away south straightway after I have breakfasted, and said
one word to the goodman.  Goodman, how call ye the next town southward,
and how far is it thither?"

Quoth Clement:  "My son, what hast thou to do with riding south?  As
thou wottest, going hence south ye must presently ride the
hill-country; and that is no safe journey for a lonely man, even if he
be a doughty knight like to thee, lord."

Said Ralph, reddening withal:  "I have an errand that way."

"An errand of King Peter's or thine own?" said Clement.

"Of King Peter's, if ye must wot," said Ralph.

Clement were no chapman had he not seen that the lad was lying; so he
said:

"Fair lord, saving your worship, how would it be as to the speeding of
King Peter's errand, if I brought thee before our mayor, and swore the
peace against thee; so that I might keep thee in courteous prison till
I had sent to thy father of thy whereabouts?"

The young man turned red with anger; but ere he could speak Dame
Katherine said sharply:  "Hold thy peace, Clement!  What hast thou to
meddle or make in the matter?  If our young lord hath will to ride out
and see the world, why should we let him?  Yea, why should his father
let him, if it come to that?  Take my word for it that my gossip shall
go through the world and come back to those that love him, as goodly as
he went forth.  And hold! here is for a token thereof."

Therewith she went to an ark that stood in the corner, and groped in
the till thereof and brought out a little necklace of blue and green
stones with gold knobs betwixt, like a pair of beads; albeit neither
pope nor priest had blessed them; and tied to the necklace was a little
box of gold with something hidden therein.  This gaud she gave to
Ralph, and said to him: "Gossip, wear this about thy neck, and let no
man take it from thee, and I think it will be salvation to thee in
peril, and good luck to thee in the time of questing; so that it shall
be to thee as if thou hadst drunk of the WELL AT THE WORLD'S END."

"What is that water?" said Ralph, "and how may I find it?"

"I know not rightly," she said, "but if a body might come by it, I hear
say it saveth from weariness and wounding and sickness; and it winneth
love from all, and maybe life everlasting.  Hast thou not heard tell of
it, my husband?"

"Yea," said the chapman, "many times; and how that whoso hath drunk
thereof hath the tongue that none may withstand, whether in buying or
selling, or prevailing over the hearts of men in any wise.  But as for
its wherabouts, ye shall not find it in these parts.  Men say that it
is beyond the Dry Tree; and that is afar, God wot!  But now, lord
Ralph, I rede thee go back again this evening with Andrew, my nephew,
for company:  forsooth, he will do little less gainful than riding with
thee to Upmeads than if he abide in Wulstead; for he is idle.  But, my
lord, take it not amiss that I spake about the mayor and the tipstaves;
for it was but a jest, as thou mayest well wot."

Ralph's face cleared at that word, and he stood smiling, weighing the
chaplet in his hand; but Dame Katherine said:

"Dear gossip, do it on speedily; for it is a gift from me unto thee:
and from a gossip even king's sons may take a gift."

Quoth Ralph:  "But is it lawful to wear it? is there no wizardry within
it?"

"Hearken to him!" she said, "and how like unto a man he speaketh; if
there were a brawl in the street, he would strike in and ask no word
thereof, not even which were the better side: whereas here is my
falcon-chick frighted at a little gold box and a pair of Saracen beads."

"Well," quoth Ralph, "the first holy man I meet shall bless them for
me."

"That shall he not," said the dame, "that shall he not.  Who wotteth
what shall betide to thee or me if he do so?  Come, do them on, and
then to table!  For seest thou not that the goodman is wearying for
meat? and even thine eyes will shine the brighter for a mouthful,
king's son and gossip."

She took him by the hand and did the beads on his neck and kissed and
fondled him before he sat down, while the goodman looked on, grinning
rather sheepishly, but said nought to them; and only called on his boy
to lead the destrier to stable.  So when they were set down, the
chapman took up the word where it had been dropped, and said:  "So,
Lord Ralph, thou must needs take to adventures, being, as thou deemest,
full grown.  That is all one as the duck taketh to water despite of the
hen that hath hatched her.  Well, it was not to be thought that Upmeads
would hold you lords much longer.  Or what is gone with my lords your
brethren?"

Said Ralph:  "They have departed at all adventure, north, east, and
west, each bearing our father's blessing and a bag of pennies.  And to
speak the truth, goodman, for I perceive I am no doctor at lying, my
father and mother would have me stay at home when my brethren were
gone, and that liketh me not; therefore am I come out to seek my luck
in the world: for Upmeads is good for a star-gazer, maybe, or a
simpler, or a priest, or a worthy good carle of the fields, but not for
a king's son with the blood running hot in his veins.  Or what sayest
thou, gossip?"

Quoth the dame:  "I could weep for thy mother; but for thee nought at
all.  It is good that thou shouldest do thy will in the season of youth
and the days of thy pleasure.  Yea, and I deem that thou shalt come
back again great and worshipful; and I am called somewhat foreseeing.
Only look to it that thou keep the pretty thing that I have just given
thee."

"Well," said the chapman, "this is fine talk about pleasure and the
doing of one's will; nevertheless a whole skin is good wares, though it
be not to be cheapened in any market of the world.  Now, lord, go thou
where thou wilt, whether I say go or abide; and forsooth I am no man of
King Peter's, that I should stay thee.  As for the name of the next
town, it is called Higham-on-the-Way, and is a big town plenteous of
victuals, with strong walls and a castle, and a very rich abbey of
monks:  and there is peace within its walls, because the father abbot
wages a many men to guard him and his, and to uphold his rights against
all comers; wherein he doth wisely, and also well.  For much folk
flocketh to his town and live well therein; and there is great recourse
of chapmen thither.  No better market is there betwixt this and
Babylon.  Well, Sir Ralph, I rede thee if thou comest unhurt to
Higham-on-the-Way, go no further for this time, but take service with
the lord abbot, and be one of his men of war; thou may'st then become
his captain if thou shouldest live; which would be no bad adventure for
one who cometh from Upmeads."

Ralph looked no brighter for this word, and he answered nought to it:
but said presently:

"And what is to be looked for beyond Higham if one goeth further?  Dost
thou know the land any further?"

The carle smiled:  "Yea forsooth, and down to the Wood Perilous, and
beyond it, and the lands beyond the Wood; and far away through them.  I
say not that I have been to the Dry Tree; but I have spoken to one who
hath heard of him who hath seen it; though he might not come by a
draught of the Well at the World's End."

Ralph's eyes flashed, and his cheeks reddened as he listened hereto;
but he spake quietly:

"Master Clement, how far dost thou make it to Higham-on-the-Way?"

"A matter of forty miles," said the Chapman; "because, as thou wottest,
if ye ride south from hence, ye shall presently bring your nose up
against the big downs, and must needs climb them at once; and when ye
are at the top of Bear Hill, and look south away ye shall see nought
but downs on downs with never a road to call a road, and never a
castle, or church, or homestead:  nought but some shepherd's hut; or at
the most the little house of a holy man with a little chapel thereby in
some swelly of the chalk, where the water hath trickled into a pool;
for otherwise the place is waterless." Therewith he took a long pull at
the tankard by his side, and went on:

"Higham is beyond all that, and out into the fertile plain; and a
little river hight Coldlake windeth about the meadows there; and it is
a fair land; though look you the wool of the downs is good, good, good!
I have foison of this year's fleeces with me.  Ye shall raise none such
in Upmeads."

Ralph sat silent a little, as if pondering, and then he started up and
said: "Good master Clement, we have eaten thy meat and thank thee for
that and other matters.  Wilt thou now be kinder, and bid thy boy bring
round Falcon our horse; for we have far to go, and must begone
straight-away."

"Yea, lord," said Clement, "even so will I do."  And he muttered under
his breath; "Thou talkest big, my lad, with thy 'we'; but thou art
pressed lest Nicholas be here presently to fetch thee back; and to say
sooth I would his hand were on thy shoulder even now."

Then he spake aloud again, and said:

"I must now begone to my lads, and I will send one round with thy
war-horse. But take my rede, my lord, and become the man of the Abbot
of St. Mary's of Higham, and all will be well."

Therewith he edged himself out of the chamber, and the dame fell to
making a mighty clatter with the vessel and trenchers and cups on the
board, while Ralph walked up and down the chamber his war-gear jingling
upon him.  Presently the dame left her table-clatter and came up to
Ralph and looked kindly into his face and said:  "Gossip, hast thou
perchance any money?"

He flushed up red, and then his face fell; yet he spake gaily: "Yea,
gossip, I have both white and red:  there are three golden crowns in my
pouch, and a little flock of silver pennies: forsooth I say not as many
as would reach from here to Upmeads, if they were laid one after the
other."

She smiled and patted his cheek, and said:

"Thou art no very prudent child, king's son.  But it comes into my mind
that my master did not mean thee to go away empty-handed; else had he
not departed and left us twain together."

Therewith she went to the credence that stood in a corner, and opened a
drawer therein and took out a little bag, and gave it into Ralph's
hand, and said:  "This is the gift of the gossip; and thou mayst take
it without shame; all the more because if thy father had been a worser
man, and a harder lord he would have had more to give thee.  But now
thou hast as much or more as any one of thy brethren."

He took the bag smiling and shame-faced, but she looked on him fondly
and said:

"Now I know not whether I shall lay old Nicholas on thine heels when he
cometh after thee, as come he will full surely; or whether I shall
suffer the old sleuth-hound nose out thy slot of himself, as full
surely he will set on to it."

"Thou mightest tell him," said Ralph, "that I am gone to take service
with the Abbot of St. Mary's of Higham:  hah?"

She laughed and said:  "Wilt thou do so, lord, and follow the rede of
that goodman of mine, who thinketh himself as wise as Solomon?"

Ralph smiled and answered her nothing.

"Well," she said, "I shall say what likes me when the hour is at hand.
Lo, here! thine horse.  Abide yet a moment of time, and then go whither
thou needs must, like the wind of the summer day."

Therewith she went out of the chamber and came back again with a scrip
which she gave to Ralph and said:  "Herein is a flask of drink for the
waterless country, and a little meat for the way.  Fare thee well,
gossip!  Little did I look for it when I rose up this morning and
nothing irked me save the dulness of our town, and the littleness of
men's doings therein, that I should have to cut off a piece of my life
from me this morning, and say, farewell gossip, as now again I do."

Therewith she kissed him on either cheek and embraced him; and it might
be said of her and him that she let him go thereafter; for though as
aforesaid he loved her, and praised her kindness, he scarce understood
the eagerness of her love for him; whereas moreover she saw him not so
often betwixt Upmeads and Wulstead:  and belike she herself scarce
understood it.  Albeit she was a childless woman.

So when he had got to horse, she watched him riding a moment, and saw
how he waved his hand to her as he turned the corner of the
market-place, and how a knot of lads and lasses stood staring on him
after she lost sight of him.  Then she turned her back into the chamber
and laid her head on the table and wept.  Then came in the goodman
quietly and stood by her and she heeded him not.  He stood grinning
curiously on her awhile, and then laid his hand on her shoulder, and
said as she raised her face to him:

"Sweetheart, it availeth nought; when thou wert young and exceeding
fair, he was but a little babe, and thou wert looking in those days to
have babes of thine own; and then it was too soon: and now that he is
such a beauteous young man, and a king's son withal, and thou art
wedded to a careful carle of no weak heart, and thou thyself art more
than two-score years old, it is too late.  Yet thou didst well to give
our lord the money.  Lo! here is wherewithal to fill up the lack in thy
chest; and here is a toy for thee in place of the pair of beads thou
gavest him; and I bid thee look on it as if I had given him my share of
the money and the beads."

She turned to Clement, and took the bag of money, and the chaplet which
he held out to her, and she said: "God wot thou art no ill man, my
husband, but would God I had a son like to him!"

She still wept somewhat; but the chapman said:  "Let it rest there,
sweetheart! let it rest there!  It may be a year or twain before thou
seest him again:  and then belike he shall be come back with some woman
whom he loves better than any other; and who knows but in a way he may
deem himself our son.  Meanwhile thou hast done well, sweetheart, so be
glad."

Therewith he kissed her and went his ways to his merchandize, and she
to the ordering of her house, grieved but not unhappy.



CHAPTER 4

Ralph Rideth the Downs


As for Ralph, he rode on with a merry heart, and presently came to an
end of the plain country, and the great downs rose up before him with a
white road winding up to the top of them.  Just before the slopes began
to rise was a little thorp beside a stream, and thereby a fair church
and a little house of Canons: so Ralph rode toward the church to see if
therein were an altar of St. Nicholas, who was his good lord and
patron, that he might ask of him a blessing on his journey.  But as he
came up to the churchyard-gate he saw a great black horse tied thereto
as if abiding some one; and as he lighted down from his saddle he saw a
man coming hastily from out the church-door and striding swiftly toward
the said gate.  He was a big man, and armed; for he had a bright steel
sallet on his head, which covered his face all save the end of his
chin; and plates he had on his legs and arms.  He wore a green coat
over his armour, and thereon was wrought in gold an image of a tree
leafless:  he had a little steel axe about his neck, and a great sword
hung by his side.  Ralph stood looking on him with his hand on the
latch of the gate, but when the man came thereto he tore it open
roughly and shoved through at once, driving Ralph back, so that he
well-nigh overset him, and so sprang to his horse and swung himself
into the saddle, just as Ralph steadied himself and ruffled up to him,
half drawing his sword from the scabbard the while.  But the
man-at-arms cried out, "Put it back, put it back!  If thou must needs
deal with every man that shoveth thee in his haste, thy life is like to
be but short."

He was settling himself in his saddle as he spoke, and now he shook his
rein, and rode off speedily toward the hill-road.  But when he was so
far off that Ralph might but see his face but as a piece of reddish
colour, he reined up for a moment of time, and turning round in his
saddle lifted up his sallet and left his face bare, and cried out as if
to Ralph, "The first time!" And then let the head-piece fall again, and
set spurs to his horse and gallopped away.

Ralph stood looking at him as he got smaller on the long white road,
and wondering what this might mean, and how the unknown man should know
him, if he did know him.  But presently he let his wonder run off him,
and went his ways into the church, wherein he found his good lord and
friend St. Nicholas, and so said a paternoster before his altar, and
besought his help, and made his offering; and then departed and gat to
horse again, and rode softly the way to the downs, for the day was hot.

The way was steep and winding, with a hollow cup of the hills below it,
and above it a bent so steep that Ralph could see but a few yards of it
on his left hand; but when he came to the hill's brow and could look
down on the said bent, he saw strange figures on the face thereof, done
by cutting away the turf so that the chalk might show clear.  A tree
with leaves was done on that hill-side, and on either hand of it a
beast like a bear ramping up against the tree; and these signs were
very ancient.  This hill-side carving could not be seen from the thorp
beneath, which was called Netherton, because the bent looked westward
down into the hollow of the hill abovesaid; but from nigher to Wulstead
they were clear to see, and Ralph had often beheld them, but never so
nigh: and that hill was called after them Bear Hill.  At the top of it
was an earth-work of the ancient folk, which also was called Bear
Castle.  And now Ralph rode over the hill's brow into it; for the walls
had been beaten down in places long and long ago.

Now he rode up the wall, and at the topmost of it turned and looked
aback on the blue country which he had ridden through stretching many a
league below, and tried if he could pick out Upmeads from amongst the
diverse wealth of the summer land: but Upmeads Water was hidden, and he
could see nothing to be sure of to tell him whereabouts the High House
stood; yet he deemed that he could make out the Debateable Wood and the
hills behind it well enough.  Then he turned his horse about, and had
the down-country before him; long lines of hills to wit, one rising
behind the other like the waves of a somewhat quiet sea: no trees
thereon, nor houses that he might see thence: nought but a green road
that went waving up and down before him greener than the main face of
the slopes.

He looked at it all for a minute or two as the south-west wind went
past his ears, and played a strange tune on the innumerable stems of
the bents and the hard-stalked blossoms, to which the bees sang
counterpoint.  Then the heart arose within him, and he drew the sword
from the scabbard, and waved it about his head, and shook it toward the
south, and cried out, "Now, welcome world, and be thou blessed from one
end to the other, from the ocean sea to the uttermost mountains!"

A while he held the white steel in his fist, and then sheathed the
blade, and rode down soberly over the turf bridge across the ancient
fosse, and so came on to the green road made many ages before by an
ancient people, and so trotted south along fair and softly.

Little is to be told of his journey through the downs: as he topped a
low hill whereon were seven grave-mounds of the ancient folk in a row,
he came on a shepherd lying amidst of his sheep: the man sprang to his
feet when he heard horse-hoofs anigh him and saw the glint of steel,
and he set his hand to a short spear which lay by him; but when he saw
nought but Ralph, and heard how he gave him the sele of the day, he
nodded his head in a friendly way, though he said nought in salutation;
for the loneliness of the downs made the speech slow within him.

Again some two miles further on Ralph met a flock of sheep coming down
a bent which the road climbed, and with them were three men, their
drovers, and they drew nigh him as he was amidst of the sheep, so that
he could scarce see the way.  Each of these three had a weapon; one a
pole-axe, another a long spear, and the third a flail jointed and bound
with iron, and an anlace hanging at his girdle.  So they stood in the
way and hailed him when the sheep were gone past; and the man with the
spear asked him whither away.  "I am turned toward Higham-on-the-Way,"
quoth he; "and how many miles shall I ride ere I get there?"

Said one of them:  "Little less than twenty, lord."  Now it was past
noon two hours, and the day was hot; so whereas the faces of the men
looked kind and friendly, albeit somewhat rugged, he lighted down from
his horse and sat down by the way-side, and drew his bottle of good
wine from out of his wallet, and asked the men if they were in haste.
"Nay, master," said he of the pole-axe, while all eyes turned to the
bottle, "HE has gone by too long; and will neither meddle with us, nor
may we deal with him."

"Well then," quoth Ralph, "there is time for bever.  Have ye ought of a
cup, that we may drink to each other?"

"Yea," said the carle with the anlace, "that have I." Therewith he drew
from his pouch a ram's horn rimmed with silver, and held it up, and
said as if he were speaking to it:  "Now, Thirly, rejoice! for ye shall
have lord's wine poured into thy maw."

Therewith he held it out toward Ralph, who laughed and filled it up,
and filled for himself a little silver cup which he carried, and said:
"To you, shepherds!  Much wool and little cry!" And he drank withal.

"And I," quoth the man with the horn, "call this health; Much cry and
little wool!"

"Well, well, how mean ye by that, Greasy Wat?" said the man with the
spear, taking the horn as he spake; "that is but a poor wish for a lord
that drinketh out of our cup."

Said Wat:  "Why, neighbour, why! thy wit is none too hasty.  The wool
that a knight sheareth is war and battle; that is wounding and death;
but the cry is the talk and boasting and minstrelsy that goeth before
all this.  Which is the best wish to wish him? the wounds and the
death, or the fore-rumour and stir thereof which hurteth no man?"

Ralph laughed thereat, and was merry and blithe with them; but the
spearman, who was an old man, said:

"For all Wat sayeth, lord, and his japes, ye must not misdeem of us
that we shepherds of the Downs can do nought but run to ales and
feasts, and that we are but pot-valiant: maybe thou thyself mayst live
to see things go otherwise:  and in that day may we have such as thee
for captain.  Now, fair lord, I drink to thy crown of valour, and thy
good luck; and we thank thee for the wine and yet more for the blithe
fellowship."

So Ralph filled up the ram's horn till Dame Katherine's good island
wine was well-nigh spent; and at last he said:

"Now, my masters, I must to horse; but I pray you tell or we depart,
what did ye mean when ye said that HE had gone past?  Who is HE?"

The merry faces of the men changed at his word, and they looked in each
other's faces, till at last the old spearman answered him:

"Fair lord, these things we have little will to talk about: for we be
poor men with no master to fleece us, and no lord to help us: also we
be folk unlearned and unlettered, and from our way of life, whereas we
dwell in the wilderness, we seldom come within the doors of a church.
But whereas we have drunk with thee, who seemest to be a man of
lineage, and thou hast been blithe with us, we will tell thee that we
have seen one riding south along the Greenway, clad in a coat as green
as the way, with the leafless tree done on his breast.  So nigh to him
we were that we heard his cry as he sped along, as ye may hear the
lapwing whining; for he said: 'POINT AND EDGE, POINT AND EDGE!  THE RED
WATER AMIDST OF THE HILLS!' In my lifetime such a man hath, to my
knowledge, been seen thrice before; and after each sight of him
followed evil days and the death of men.  Moreover this is the Eve of
St. John, and we deem the token the worse therefor.  Or how deemest
thou?"

Ralph stood silent awhile; for he was thinking of the big man whom he
had met at the churchyard gate, and all this tale seemed wonderful to
him.  But at last he said:

"I cannot tell what there is in it; herein am I no help to you.  To-day
I am but little; though I may one day be great.  Yet this may I do for
you; tomorrow will I let sing a mass in St. Mary's Church on your
behoof.  And hereafter, if I wax as my will is, and I come to be lord
in these lands, I will look to it to do what a good lord should do for
the shepherds of the Downs, so that they may live well, and die in good
hope.  So may the Mother of God help me at need!"

Said the old shepherd:  "Thou hast sworn an oath, and it is a good
oath, and well sworn.  Now if thou dost as thou swearest, words can but
little thanks, yet deeds may.  Wherefore if ever thou comest back
hither, and art in such need that a throng of men may help thee
therein; then let light a great fire upon each corner of the topmost
wall of Bear Castle, and call to mind this watch-word: 'SMITE ASIDE THE
AXE, O BEAR-FATHER,' and then shalt thou see what shall betide thee for
thy good-hap: farewell now, with the saints to aid!"

Ralph bade them live well and hail, and mounted his horse and rode off
down the Greenway, and as he rode the shepherds waved their weapons to
him in token of good-will.



CHAPTER 5

Ralph Cometh to Higham-on-the-Way


Nought more befell Ralph to tell of till he came to the end of the
Downs and saw Higham lying below him overlooked by a white castle on a
knoll, and with a river lapping it about and winding on through its
fair green meadows even as Clement had told.  From amidst its houses
rose up three towers of churches above their leaden roofs, and high
above all, long and great, the Abbey Church; and now was the low sun
glittering on its gilded vanes and the wings of the angels high upon
the battlements.

So Ralph rode down the slopes and was brisk about it, for it was
drawing toward sunset, and he knew not at what hour they shut their
gates.  The road was steep and winding, and it was the more part of an
hour ere he came to the gate, which was open, and like to be yet, for
many folk were thronging in, which throng also had hindered him soon
after he came into the plain country.  The gate was fair and strong,
but Ralph saw no men-at-arms about it that evening.  He rode into the
street unquestioned, and therein was the throng great of people clad in
fair and gay attire; and presently Ralph called to mind that this was
St. John's Eve, so that he knew that there was some feast toward.

At last the throng was so thick that he was stayed by it; and
therewithal a religious who was beside him and thrust up against his
horse, turned to him and gave him good even, and said:  "By thy weapons
and gear thou art a stranger here in our burg, Sir Knight?"

"So it is," said Ralph.

"And whither away?" said the monk; "hast thou some kinsman or friend in
the town?"

"Nay," said Ralph, "I seek a good hostelry where I may abide the night
for my money."

The monk shook his head and said:  "See ye the folk?  It is holiday
time, and midsummer after haysel.  Ye shall scarce get lodging outside
our house.  But what then?  Come thou thither straightway and have
harbour of the best, and see our prior, who loveth young and brisk
men-at-arms like to thee.  Lo now! the throng openeth a little; I will
walk by thy bridle and lead thee the shortest road thither."

Ralph gainsaid him not, and they bored through the throng of the street
till they came into the market-square, which was very great and clean,
paved with stones all over:  tall and fair houses rose up on three
sides of it, and on the fourth was the Great Church which made those
houses seem but low: most of it was new-built; for the lord Abbot that
then was, though he had not begun it, had taken the work up from his
forerunner and had pushed it forward all he might; for he was very
rich, and an open-handed man.  Like dark gold it showed under the
evening sun, and the painted and gilded imagery shone like jewels upon
it.

"Yea," said the monk, as he noted Ralph's wonder at this wonder; "a
most goodly house it is, and happy shall they be that dwell there."

Therewith he led Ralph on, turning aside through the great square.
Ralph saw that there were many folk therein, though it was too big to
be thronged thick with them.  Amidst of it was now a great pile of wood
hung about with flowers, and hard by it a stage built up with hangings
of rich cloth on one side thereof.  He asked the monk what this might
mean, and he told him the wood was for the Midsummer bale-fire, and the
stage for the show that should come thereafter.  So the brother led
Ralph down a lane to the south of the great west door, and along the
side of the minster and so came to the Abbey gate, and there was Ralph
well greeted, and had all things given him which were due to a good
knight; and then was he brought into the Guest-hall, a very fair
chamber, which was now full of men of all degrees.  He was shown to a
seat on the dais within two of the subprior's, and beside him sat an
honourable lord, a vassal of St. Mary's. So was supper served well and
abundantly:  the meat and drink was of the best, and the vessel and all
the plenishing was as good as might be; and the walls of that chamber
were hung with noble arras-cloth picturing the Pilgrimage of the Soul
of Man.

Every man there who spoke with Ralph, and they were many, was exceeding
courteous to him; and he heard much talk about him of the wealth of the
lands of St. Mary's at Higham, and how it was flourishing; and of the
Abbot how mighty he was, so that he might do what he would, and that
his will was to help and to give, and be blithe with all men: and folk
told of turmoil and war in other lands, and praised the peace of
Higham-on-the-Way.

Ralph listened to all this, and smiled, and said to himself that to
another man this might well be the end of his journey for that time;
but for him all this peace and well-being was not enough; for though it
were a richer land than Upmeads, yet to the peace and the quiet he was
well used, and he had come forth not for the winning of fatter peace,
but to try what new thing his youth and his might and his high hope and
his good hap might accomplish.

So when the supper was over, and the wine and spices had been brought,
the Guest-hall began to thin somewhat, and the brother who had brought
Ralph thither came to him and said:

"Fair lord, it were nowise ill if ye went forth, as others of our
guests have done, to see the deeds of Midsummer Eve that shall be done
in the great square in honour of Holy John; for our manner therein at
Higham has been much thought of.  Look my son!"

He pointed to the windows of the hall therewith, and lo! they grew
yellow and bright with some fire without, as if a new fiery day had
been born out of the dusk of the summer night; for the light that shone
through the windows out-did the candle-light in the hall.  Ralph
started thereat and laid his right hand to the place of his sword,
which indeed he had left with the chamberlain; but the monk laughed and
said:  "Fear nothing, lord; there is no foeman in Higham: come now,
lest thou be belated of the show."

So he led Ralph forth, and into the square, where there was a space
appointed for the brethren and their guests to see the plays; and the
square was now so full of folk that it seemed like as if that there
were no one man in the streets which were erewhile so thronged.

There were rows of men-at-arms in bright armour also to keep the folk
in their places, like as hurdles pen the sheep up; howbeit they were
nowise rough with folk, but humble and courteous.  Many and many were
the torches and cressets burning steadily in the calm air, so that, as
aforesaid, night was turned into day.  But on the scaffold aforesaid
were standing bright and gay figures, whose names or what they were
Ralph had no time to ask.

Now the bells began to clash from the great tower of the minster, and
in a little while they had clashed themselves into order and rang clear
and tuneably for a space; and while they were ringing, lo! those
gay-clad people departed from the scaffold, and a canvas painted like a
mountain-side, rocky and with caves therein, was drawn up at the back
of it.  Then came thereon one clad like a king holding a fair maiden by
the hand, and with him was a dame richly clad and with a crown on her
head.  So these two kissed the maiden, and lamented over her, and went
their ways, and the maiden left alone sat down upon a rock and covered
up her face and wept; and while Ralph wondered what this might mean, or
what grieved the maiden, there came creeping, as it were from out of a
cranny of the rocks, a worm huge-headed and covered over with scales
that glittered in the torch-light. Then Ralph sprang up in his place,
for he feared for the maiden that the worm would devour her:  but the
monk who sat by him pulled him down by the skirt, and laughed and said:
"Sit still, lord! for the champion also has been provided."

Then Ralph sat down again somewhat abashed and looked on; yet was his
heart in his mouth the while.  And so while the maiden stood as one
astonied before the worm, who gaped upon her with wide open mouth,
there came forth from a cleft in the rocks a goodly knight who bore
silver, a red cross; and he had his sword in his hand, and he fell upon
the worm to smite him; and the worm ramped up against him, and there
was battle betwixt them, while the maiden knelt anigh with her hands
clasped together.

Then Ralph knew that this was a play of the fight of St. George with
the worm; so he sat silent till the champion had smitten off the worm's
head and had come to the maiden and kissed and embraced her, and shown
her the grisly head.  Then presently came many folk on to the scaffold,
to wit, the king and queen who were the father and mother of the
maiden, and a bishop clad in very fair vestments, and knights withal;
and they stood about St. George and the maiden, and with them were
minstrels who fell to playing upon harps and fiddles; while other some
fell to singing a sweet song in honour of St. George, and the maiden
delivered.

So when it was all done, the monk said:  "This play is set forth by the
men-at-arms of our lord Abbot, who have great devotion toward St.
George, and he is their friend and their good lord.  But hereafter will
be other plays, of wild men and their feasting in the woods in the
Golden Age of the world; and that is done by the scribes and the
limners.  And after that will be a pageant of St. Agnes ordered by the
clothiers and the webbers, which be both many and deft in this good
town.  Albeit thou art a young man and hast ridden far to-day belike,
and mayhappen thou wilt not be able to endure it: so it may be well to
bring thee out of this throng straightway.  Moreover I have bethought
me, that there is much of what is presently to come which we shall see
better from the minster roof, or even it may be from the tower:  wilt
thou come then?"

Ralph had liefer have sat there and seen all the plays to the end, for
they seemed to him exceeding fair, and like to ravish the soul from the
body; howbeit, being shamefaced, he knew not how to gainsay the
brother, who took him by the hand, and led him through the press to the
west front of the minster, where on the north side was a little door in
a nook.  So they went up a stair therein a good way till they came into
a gallery over the western door; and looking forth thence Ralph deemed
that he could have seen a long way had daylight been, for it was higher
than the tops of the highest houses.

So there they abode a space looking down on the square and its throng,
and the bells, which had been ringing when they came up, now ceased a
while.  But presently there arose great shouts and clamour amongst the
folk below, and they could see men with torches drawing near to the
pile of wood, and then all of a sudden shot up from it a great spiring
flame, and all the people shouted together, while the bells broke out
again over their heads.

Then the brother pointed aloof with his finger and said: "Lo you! fair
lord, how bale speaks to bale all along the headlands of the
down-country, and below there in the thorps by the river!"

Forsooth Ralph saw fire after fire break out to the westward; and the
brother said:  "And if we stood over the high altar and looked east, ye
would see more of such fires and many more; and all these bales are
piled up and lighted by vassals and villeins of my lord Abbot: now
to-night they are but mere Midsummer bale-fires; but doubt ye not that
if there came war into the land each one of these bales would mean at
least a half-score of stout men, archers and men-at-arms, all ready to
serve their lord at all adventure.  All this the tyrants round about,
that hate holy Church and oppress the poor, know full well; therefore
we live in peace in these lands."

Ralph hearkened, but said nought; for amidst all this flashing of fire
and flame, and the crying out of folk, and the measured clash of the
bells so near him, his thought was confused, and he had no words ready
to hand.  But the monk turned from the parapet and looked him full in
the face and said to him:

"Thou art a fair young man, and strong, and of gentle blood as I deem;
and thou seemest to me to have the lucky look in thine eyes: now I tell
thee that if thou wert to take service with my lord thou shouldest
never rue it.  Yea, why shouldest thou not wax in his service, and
become his Captain of Captains, which is an office meet for kings?"

Ralph looked on him, but answered nought, for he could not gather his
thoughts for an answer; and the brother said: "Think of it, I bid thee,
fair young lord; and be sure that nowhere shalt thou have a better
livelihood, not even wert thou a king's son; for the children of my
lord Abbot are such that none dareth to do them any displeasure;
neither is any overlord as good as is Holy Church."

"Yea," said Ralph, "doubtless thou sayest sooth; yet I wot not that I
am come forth to seek a master."

Said the brother:  "Nay, do but see the lord Abbot, as thou mayst do
to-morrow, if thou wilt."

"I would have his blessing," said Ralph.

"No less shalt thou have," said the brother; "but look you down yonder;
for I can see tokens that my lord is even now coming forth."

Ralph looked down and beheld the folk parting to right and left, and a
lane made amidst the throng, guarded by men-at-arms mingled with the
cross-bearers and brethren; and the sound of trumpets blared forth over
the noises of the throng.

"If the lord Abbot cometh," said Ralph, "I were fain of his blessing
to-night before I sleep:  so go we down straightway that I may kneel
before him with the rest."

"What!" said the monk, "Wilt thou, my lord, kneel amongst all these
burgesses and vavassors when thou mightest see the Abbot in his own
chamber face to face alone with him?"

"Father," said Ralph, "I am no great man, and I must needs depart
betimes to-morrow; for I perceive that here are things too mighty and
over-mastering for such as I be."

"Well," said the monk, "yet mayst thou come back again; so at present I
will make no more words about it."

So they went down, and came out amidst the throng, above which the bale
still flared high, making the summer night as light as day.  The
brother made way for Ralph, so that they stood in the front row of
folk:  they had not been there one minute ere they heard the sound of
the brethren singing, and the Abbot came forth out of the lane that
went down to the gate.  Then all folk went down upon their knees, and
thus abode him.  Right so Ralph deemed that he felt some one pull his
sleeve, but in such a throng that was nought of a wonder; howbeit, he
turned and looked to his left, whence came the tug, and saw kneeling
beside him a tall man-at-arms, who bore a sallet on his head in such
wise that it covered all his face save the point of his chin.  Then
Ralph bethought him of the man of the leafless tree, and he looked to
see what armoury the man bore on his coat; but he had nothing save a
loose frock of white linen over his hauberk.  Nevertheless, he heard a
voice in his ear, which said, "The second time!" whereon he deemed that
it was verily that same man:  yet had he nought to do to lay hold on
him, and he might not speak with him, for even therewith came the Abbot
in garments all of gold, going a-foot under a canopy of baudekyn, with
the precious mitre on his head, and the crozier borne before him, as if
he had been a patriarch: for he was an exceeding mighty lord.

Ralph looked hard on him as he passed by, blessing the folk with
upraised hand; and he saw that he was a tall spare man, clean-shaven,
and thin-faced; but no old man, belike scarce of fifty winters.  Ralph
caught his eye, and he smiled on the goodly young man so kindly, that
for a moment Ralph deemed that he would dwell in St. Mary's House for a
little while; for, thought he, if my father, or Nicholas, hear of me
therein, they must even let me alone to abide here.

Therewith the Abbot went forth to his place, and sat him down under a
goodly cloth of estate, and folk stood up again; but when Ralph looked
for the man in the sallet he could see nought of him.  Now when the
Abbot was set down, men made a clear ring round about the bale, and
there came into the said ring twelve young men, each clad in nought
save a goat-skin, and with garlands of leaves and flowers about their
middles: they had with them a wheel done about with straw and hemp
payed with pitch and brimstone.  They set fire to the same, and then
trundled it blazing round about the bale twelve times.  Then came to
them twelve damsels clad in such-like guise as the young men:  then
both bands, the young men and the maidens, drew near to the bale, which
was now burning low, and stood about it, and joined hands, and so
danced round it a while, and meantime the fiddles played an uncouth
tune merrily: then they sundered, and each couple of men and maids
leapt backward and forward over the fire; and when they had all leapt,
came forward men with buckets of water which they cast over the dancers
till it ran down them in streams.  Then was all the throng mingled
together, and folk trod the embers of the bale under foot, and
scattered them hither and thither all over the square.

All this while men were going about with pitchers of wine and ale, and
other good drinks; and every man drank freely what he would, and there
was the greatest game and joyance.

But now was Ralph exceeding weary, and he said:  "Father, mightest thou
lead me out of this throng, and show me some lair where I may sleep in
peace, I would thank thee blithely."

As he spake there sounded a great horn over the square, and the Abbot
rose in his place and blessed all the people once more.  Then said the
monk:

"Come then, fair field-lord, now shalt thou have thy will of bed." And
he laughed therewith, and drew Ralph out of the throng and brought him
into the Abbey, and into a fair little chamber, on the wall whereof was
pictured St. Christopher, and St. Julian the lord and friend of
wayfarers.  Then he brought Ralph the wine and spices, and gave him
good-night, and went his ways.

As Ralph put the raiment from off him he said to himself: a long day
forsooth, so long that I should have thought no day could have held all
that has befallen me.  So many strange things have I seen, that surely
my dreams shall be full of them; for even now I seem to see them,
though I waken.

So he lay down in his bed and slept, and dreamed that he was fishing
with an angle in a deep of Upmeads Water; and he caught many fish; but
after a while whatsoever he caught was but of gilded paper stuffed with
wool, and at last the water itself was gone, and he was casting his
angle on to a dry road.  Therewith he awoke and saw that day was
dawning, and heard the minster clock strike three, and heard the
thrushes singing their first song in the Prior's garden.  Then he
turned about and slept, and dreamed no more till he woke up in the
bright sunny morning.



CHAPTER 6

Ralph Goeth His Ways From the Abbey of St. Mary at Higham


It was the monk who had been his guide the day before who had now waked
him, and he stood by the bedside holding a great bowl of milk in his
hand, and as Ralph sat up, and rubbed his eyes, with all his youthful
sloth upon him, the monk laughed and said:

"That is well, lord, that is well!  I love to see a young man so sleepy
in the morning; it is a sign of thriving; and I see thou art thriving
heartily for the time when thou shalt come back to us to lead my lord's
host in battle."

"Where be the bale-fires?" said Ralph, not yet fully awake.

"Where be they!" said the brother, "where be they!  They be sunken to
cold coals long ago, like many a man's desires and hopes, who hath not
yet laid his head on the bosom of the mother, that is Holy Church.
Come, my lord, arise, and drink the monk's wine of morning, and then if
ye must need ride, ride betimes, and ride hard; for the Wood Perilous
beginneth presently as ye wend your ways; and it were well for thee to
reach the Burg of the Four Friths ere thou be benighted.  For, son,
there be untoward things in the wood; and though some of them be of
those for whom Christ's Cross was shapen, yet have they forgotten hell,
and hope not for heaven, and their by-word is, 'Thou shalt lack ere I
lack.' Furthermore there are worse wights in the wood than they be--
God save us!--but against them have I a good hauberk, a neck-guard
which I will give thee, son, in token that I look to see thee again at
the lovely house of Mary our Mother."

Ralph had taken the bowl and was drinking, but he looked over the brim,
and saw how the monk drew from his frock a pair of beads, as like to
Dame Katherine's gift as one pea to another, save that at the end
thereof was a little box shapen crosswise.  Ralph emptied the bowl
hastily, got out of bed, and sat on the bed naked, save that on his
neck was Dame Katherine's gift.  He reached out his hand and took the
beads from the monk and reddened therewith, as was his wont when he had
to begin a contest in words: but he said:

"I thank thee, father; yet God wot if these beads will lie sweetly
alongside the collar which I bear on my neck as now, which is the gift
of a dear friend."

The monk made up a solemn countenance and said: "Thou sayest sooth, my
son; it is most like that my chaplet, which hath been blessed time was
by the holy Richard, is no meet fellow for the gift of some light love
of thine: or even," quoth he, noting Ralph's flush deepen, and his brow
knit, "or even if it were the gift of a well-willer, yet belike it is a
worldly gift; therefore, since thy journey is with peril, thou wert
best do it off and let me keep it for thee till thou comest again."

Now as he spake he looked anxiously, nay, it may be said greedily, at
the young man.  But Ralph said nought; for in his heart he was
determined not to chaffer away his gossip's gift for any shaveling's
token.  Yet he knew not how to set his youthful words against the
father's wisdom; so he stood up, and got his shirt into his hand, and
as he did it over his head he fell to singing to himself a song of
eventide of the High House of Upmeads, the words whereof were somewhat
like to these:


  Art thou man, art thou maid, through the long grass a-going?
    For short shirt thou bearest, and no beard I see,
  And the last wind ere moonrise about thee is blowing.
    Would'st thou meet with thy maiden or look'st thou for me?

  Bright shineth the moon now, I see thy gown longer;
    And down by the hazels Joan meeteth her lad:
  But hard is thy palm, lass, and scarcely were stronger
    Wat's grip than thine hand-kiss that maketh me glad.

  And now as the candles shine on us and over,
    Full shapely thy feet are, but brown on the floor,
  As the bare-footed mowers amidst of the clover
    When the gowk's note is broken and mid-June is o'er.

  O hard are mine hand-palms because on the ridges
    I carried the reap-hook and smote for thy sake;
  And in the hot noon-tide I beat off the midges
    As thou slep'st 'neath the linden o'er-loathe to awake.

  And brown are my feet now because the sun burneth
    High up on the down-side amidst of the sheep,
  And there in the hollow wherefrom the wind turneth,
    Thou lay'st in my lap while I sung thee to sleep.

  O friend of the earth, O come nigher and nigher,
    Thou art sweet with the sun's kiss as meads of the May,
  O'er the rocks of the waste, o'er the water and fire,
    Will I follow thee, love, till earth waneth away.


The monk hearkened to him with knitted brow, and as one that liketh not
the speech of his fellow, though it be not wise to question it: then he
went out of the chamber, but left the pair of beads lying in the
window.  But Ralph clad himself in haste, and when he was fully clad,
went up to the window and took the beads in his hand, and looked into
them curiously and turned them over, but left them lying there.  Then
he went forth also, and came into the forecourt of the house, and found
there a squire of the men-at-arms with his weapons and horse, who
helped him to do on his war-gear.

So then, just as he was setting his foot in the stirrup, came the
Brother again, with his face once more grown smiling and happy; and in
his left hand he held the chaplet, but did not offer it to Ralph again,
but nodded his head to him kindly, and said: "Now, lord, I can see by
thy face that thou art set on beholding the fashion of this world, and
most like it will give thee the rue."

Then came a word into Ralph's mouth, and he said: "Wilt thou tell me,
father, whose work was the world's fashion?"

The monk reddened, but answered nought, and Ralph spake again:

"Forsooth, did the craftsman of it fumble over his work?"

Then the monk scowled, but presently he enforced himself to speak
blithely, and said:  "Such matters are over high for my speech or
thine, lord; but I tell thee, who knoweth, that there are men in this
House who have tried the world and found it wanting."

Ralph smiled, and said stammering:

"Father, did the world try them, and find them wanting perchance?"

Then he reddened, and said:  "Are ye verily all such as this in this
House?  Who then is it who hath made so fair a lordship, and so goodly
a governance for so many people?  Know ye not at all of the world's
ways!"

"Fair sir," said the monk sternly, "they that work for us work for the
Lord and all his servants."

"Yea," said Ralph, "so it is; and will the Lord be content with the
service of him whom the devil hath cast out because he hath found him a
dastard?"

The monk frowned, yet smiled somewhat withal, and said: "Sir, thou art
young, but thy wits are over old for me; but there are they in this
House who may answer thee featly; men who have read the books of the
wise men of the heathen, and the doctors of Holy Church, and are even
now making books for the scribes to copy."  Then his voice softened,
and he said: "Dear lord, we should be right fain of thee here, but
since thou must needs go, go with my blessing, and double blessing
shalt thou have when thou comest back to us."  Then Ralph remembered
his promise to the shepherds and took a gold crown from his pouch, and
said: "Father, I pray thee say a mass for the shepherd downsmen; and
this is for the offering."

The monk praised the gift and the bidding, and kissed Ralph, who clomb
into his saddle; and the brother hospitalier brought him his wallet
with good meat and drink therein for the way.  Then Ralph shook his
rein, and rode out of the abbey-gate, smiling at the lay-brethren and
the men-at-arms who hung about there.

But he sighed for pleasure when he found himself in the street again,
and looked on the shops of the chapmen and the booths of the petty
craftsmen, as shoe-smiths and glovers, and tinsmiths and coppersmiths,
and horners and the like; and the folk that he met as he rode toward
the southern gate seemed to him merry and in good case, and goodly to
look on.  And he thought it pleasant to gaze on the damsels in the
street, who were fair and well clad:  and there were a many of them
about his way now, especially as he drew nigh the gate before the
streets branched off: for folk were coming in from the countryside with
victual and other wares for the town and the Abbey; and surely as he
looked on some of the maidens he deemed that Hall-song of Upmeads a
good one.



CHAPTER 7

The Maiden of Bourton Abbas


So went he through the gate, and many, both of men and maids gazed at
him, for he was fair to look on, but none meddled with him.

There was a goodly fauburg outside the gate, and therein were fair
houses, not a few, with gardens and orchards about them; and when these
were past he rode through very excellent meadows lying along the water,
which he crossed thrice, once by a goodly stone bridge and twice by
fords; for the road was straight, and the river wound about much.

After a little while the road led him off the plain meads into a
country of little hills and dales, the hill-sides covered with
vineyards and orchards, and the dales plenteous of corn-fields; and now
amongst these dales Higham was hidden from him.

Through this tillage and vine-land he rode a good while, and thought he
had never seen a goodlier land; and as he went he came on husbandmen
and women of the country going about their business: yet were they not
too busy to gaze on him, and most greeted him; and with some he gave
and took a little speech.

These people also he deemed well before the world, for they were well
clad and buxom, and made no great haste as they went, but looked about
them as though they deemed the world worth looking at, and as if they
had no fear either of a blow or a hard word for loitering.

So he rode till it was noon, and he was amidst a little thorp of grey
stone houses, trim enough, in a valley wherein there was more of
wild-wood trees and less of fruit-bearers than those behind him.  In
the thorp was a tavern with the sign of the Nicholas, so Ralph deemed
it but right to enter a house which was under the guard of his master
and friend; therefore he lighted down and went in.  Therein he found a
lad of fifteen winters, and a maiden spinning, they two alone, who
hailed him and asked his pleasure, and he bade them bring him meat and
drink, and look to his horse, for that he had a mind to rest a while.
So they brought him bread and flesh, and good wine of the hill-side, in
a little hall well arrayed as of its kind; and he sat down and the
damsel served him at table, but the lad, who had gone to see to his
horse, did not come back.

So when he had eaten and drunk, and the damsel was still there, he
looked on her and saw that she was sad and drooping of aspect; and
whereas she was a fair maiden, Ralph, now that he was full, fell to
pitying her, and asked her what was amiss.  "For," said he, "thou art
fair and ailest nought; that is clear to see; neither dwellest thou in
penury, but by seeming hast enough and to spare.  Or art thou a servant
in this house, and hath any one misused thee?"

She wept at his words, for indeed he spoke softly to her; then she
said:  "Young lord, thou art kind, and it is thy kindness that draweth
the tears from me; else it were not well to weep before a young man:
therefore I pray thee pardon me.  As for me, I am no servant, nor has
any one misused me: the folk round about are good and neighbourly; and
this house and the croft, and a vineyard hard by, all that is mine own
and my brother's; that is the lad who hath gone to tend thine horse.
Yea, and we live in peace here for the most part; for this thorp, which
is called Bourton Abbas, is a land of the Abbey of Higham; though it be
the outermost of its lands and the Abbot is a good lord and a defence
against tyrants.  All is well with me if one thing were not."

"What is thy need then?" said Ralph, "if perchance I might amend it."
And as he looked on her he deemed her yet fairer than he had done at
first.  But she stayed her weeping and sobbing and said:  "Sir, I fear
me that I have lost a dear friend."  "How then," said he, "why fearest
thou, and knowest not? doth thy friend lie sick between life and
death?" "O Sir," she said, "it is the Wood which is the evil and
disease."

"What wood is that?" said he.

She said:  "The Wood Perilous, that lieth betwixt us and the Burg of
the Four Friths, and all about the Burg.  And, Sir, if ye be minded to
ride to the Burg to-day, do it not, for through the wood must thou wend
thereto; and ye are young and lovely.  Therefore take my rede, and
abide till the Chapmen wend thither from Higham, who ride many in
company.  For, look you, fair lord, ye have asked of my grief, and this
it is and nought else; that my very earthly love and speech-friend rode
five days ago toward the Burg of the Four Friths all alone through the
Wood Perilous, and he has not come back, though we looked to see him in
three days' wearing:  but his horse has come back, and the reins and
the saddle all bloody."

And she fell a-weeping with the telling of the tale.  But Ralph said
(for he knew not what to say): "Keep a good heart, maiden; maybe he is
safe and sound; oft are young men fond to wander wide, even as I
myself."

She looked at him hard and said:  "If thou hast stolen thyself away
from them that love thee, thou hast done amiss.  Though thou art a
lord, and so fair as I see thee, yet will I tell thee so much."

Ralph reddened and answered nought; but deemed the maiden both fair and
sweet.  But she said:  "Whether thou hast done well or ill, do no
worse; but abide till the Chapmen come from Higham, on their way to the
Burg of the Four Friths.  Here mayst thou lodge well and safely if thou
wilt.  Or if our hall be not dainty enough for thee, then go back to
Higham: I warrant me the monks will give thee good guesting as long as
thou wilt."

"Thou art kind, maiden," said Ralph, "but why should I tarry for an
host? and what should I fear in the Wood, as evil as it may be?  One
man journeying with little wealth, and unknown, and he no weakling, but
bearing good weapons, hath nought to dread of strong-thieves, who ever
rob where it is easiest and gainfullest.  And what worse may I meet
than strong-thieves?"

"But thou mayest meet worse," she said; and therewith fell a-weeping
again, and said amidst her tears:  "O weary on my life!  And why should
I heed thee when nought heedeth me, neither the Saints of God's House,
nor the Master of it; nor the father and the mother that were once so
piteous kind to me?  O if I might but drink a draught from the WELL AT
THE WORLD'S END!"

He turned about on her hastily at that word; for he had risen to
depart; being grieved at her grief and wishful to be away from it,
since he might not amend it.  But now he said eagerly:

"Where then is that Well?  Know ye of it in this land?"

"At least I know the hearsay thereof," she said; "but as now thou shalt
know no more from me thereof; lest thou wander the wider in seeking it.
I would not have thy life spilt."

Ever as he looked on her he thought her still fairer; and now he looked
long on her, saying nought, and she on him in likewise, and the blood
rose to her cheeks and her brow, but she would not turn her from his
gaze.  At last he said: "Well then, I must depart, no more learned than
I came: but yet am I less hungry and thirsty than I came; and have thou
thanks therefor."

Therewith he took from his pouch a gold piece of Upmeads, which was
good, and of the touch of the Easterlings, and held it out to her.  And
she put out her open hand and he put the money in it; but thought it
good to hold her hand a while, and she gainsayed him not.

Then he said:  "Well then, I must needs depart with things left as they
are: wilt thou bid thy brother bring hither my horse, for time presses."

"Yea," she said (and her hand was still in his), "Yet do thine utmost,
yet shalt thou not get to the Burg before nightfall.  O wilt thou not
tarry?"

"Nay," he said, "my heart will not suffer it; lest I deem myself a
dastard."

Then she reddened again, but as if she were wroth; and she drew her
hand away from his and smote her palms together thrice and cried out:
"Ho Hugh! bring hither the Knight's horse and be speedy!"

And she went hither and thither about the hall and into the buttery and
back, putting away the victual and vessels from the board and making as
if she heeded him not:  and Ralph looked on her, and deemed that each
way she moved was better than the last, so shapely of fashion she was;
and again he bethought him of the Even-song of the High House at
Upmeads, and how it befitted her; for she went barefoot after the
manner of maidens who work afield, and her feet were tanned with the
sun of hay harvest, but as shapely as might be; but she was clad goodly
withal, in a green gown wrought with flowers.

So he watched her going to and fro; and at last he said: "Maiden, wilt
thou come hither a little, before I depart?"

"Yea," she said; and came and stood before him: and he deemed that she
was scarce so sad as she had been; and she stood with her hands joined
and her eyes downcast.  Then he said:

"Now I depart.  Yet I would say this, that I am sorry of thy sorrow:
and now since I shall never see thee more, small would be the harm if I
were to kiss thy lips and thy face."

And therewith he took her hands in his and drew her to him, and put his
arms about her and kissed her many times, and she nothing lothe by
seeming; and he found her as sweet as May blossom.

Thereafter she smiled on him, yet scarce for gladness, and said: "It is
not all so sure that I shall not see thee again; yet shall I do to thee
as thou hast done to me."

Therewith she took his face between her hands, and kissed him
well-favouredly; so that the hour seemed good to him.

Then she took him by the hand and led him out-a-doors to his horse,
whereby the lad had been standing a good while; and he when he saw his
sister come out with the fair knight he scowled on them, and handled a
knife which hung at his girdle; but Ralph heeded him nought.  As for
the damsel, she put her brother aside, and held the stirrup for Ralph;
and when he was in the saddle she said to him:

"All luck go with thee!  Forsooth I deem thee safer in the Wood than my
words said.  Verily I deem that if thou wert to meet a company of
foemen, thou wouldest compel them to do thy bidding."

"Farewell to thee maiden," said Ralph, "and mayst thou find thy beloved
whole and well, and that speedily.  Fare-well!"

She said no more; so he shook his rein and rode his ways; but looked
over his shoulder presently and saw her standing yet barefoot on the
dusty highway shading her eyes from the afternoon sun and looking after
him, and he waved his hand to her and so went his ways between the
houses of the Thorp.



CHAPTER 8

Ralph Cometh to the Wood Perilous.  An Adventure Therein


Now when he was clear of the Thorp the road took him out of the dale;
and when he was on the hill's brow he saw that the land was of other
fashion from that which lay behind him.  For the road went straight
through a rough waste, no pasture, save for mountain sheep or goats,
with a few bushes scattered about it; and beyond this the land rose
into a long ridge; and on the ridge was a wood thick with trees, and no
break in them.  So on he rode, and soon passed that waste, which was
dry and parched, and the afternoon sun was hot on it; so he deemed it
good to come under the shadow of the thick trees (which at the first
were wholly beech trees), for it was now the hottest of the day.  There
was still a beaten way between the tree-boles, though not overwide,
albeit, a highway, since it pierced the wood.  So thereby he went at a
soft pace for the saving of his horse, and thought but little of all he
had been told of the perils of the way, and not a little of the fair
maid whom he had left behind at the Thorp.

After a while the thick beech-wood gave out, and he came into a place
where great oaks grew, fair and stately, as though some lord's
wood-reeve had taken care that they should not grow over close
together, and betwixt them the greensward was fine, unbroken, and
flowery.  Thereby as he rode he beheld deer, both buck and hart and
roe, and other wild things, but for a long while no man.

The afternoon wore and still he rode the oak wood, and deemed it a
goodly forest for the greatest king on earth.  At last he came to where
another road crossed the way he followed, and about the crossway was
the ground clearer of trees, while beyond it the trees grew thicker,
and there was some underwood of holly and thorn as the ground fell off
as towards a little dale.

There Ralph drew rein, because he doubted in his mind which was his
right road toward the Burg of the Four Friths; so he got off his horse
and abode a little, if perchance any might come by; he looked about
him, and noted on the road that crossed his, and the sward about it,
the sign of many horses having gone by, and deemed that they had passed
but a little while.  So he lay on the ground to rest him and let his
horse stray about and bite the grass; for the beast loved him and would
come at his call or his whistle.

Ralph was drowsy when he lay down, and though he said to himself that
he would nowise go to sleep, yet as oft happens, he had no defence to
make against sleepiness, and presently his hands relaxed, his head fell
aside, and he slept quietly.  When he woke up in a little space of
time, he knew at once that something had awaked him and that he had not
had his sleep out; for in his ears was the trampling of horse-hoofs and
the clashing of weapons and loud speech of men.  So he leapt up
hastily, and while he was yet scarce awake, took to whistling on his
horse; but even therewith those men were upon him, and two came up to
him and laid hold of him; and when he asked them what they would, they
bade him hold his peace.

Now his eyes cleared, and he saw that those men were in goodly
war-gear, and bore coats of plate, and cuir-bouilly, or of bright
steel; they held long spears and were girt with good swords; there was
a pennon with them, green, whereon was done a golden tower, embattled,
amidst of four white ways; and the same token bore many of the men on
their coats and sleeves.  Unto this same pennon he was brought by the
two men who had taken him, and under it, on a white horse, sat a Knight
bravely armed at all points with the Tower and Four Ways on his green
surcoat; and beside him was an ancient man-at-arms, with nought but an
oak wreath on his bare head, and his white beard falling low over his
coat:  but behind these twain a tall young man, also on a white horse
and very gaily clad, upheld the pennon.  On one side of these three
were five men, unarmed, clad in green coats, with a leafless tree done
on them in gold:  they were stout carles, bearded and fierce-faced:
their hands were bound behind their backs and their feet tied together
under their horses' bellies.  The company of those about the Knight,
Ralph deemed, would number ten score men.

So when those twain stayed Ralph before the Knight, he turned to the
old man and said:

"It is of no avail asking this lither lad if he be of them or no: for
no will be his answer.  But what sayest thou, Oliver?"

The ancient man drew closer to Ralph and looked at him up and down and
all about; for those two turned him about as if he had been a joint of
flesh on the roasting-jack; and at last he said:

"His beard is sprouting, else might ye have taken him for a maid of
theirs, one of those of whom we wot.  But to say sooth I seem to know
the fashion of his gear, even as Duke Jacob knew Joseph's tabard.  So
ask him whence he is, lord, and if he lie, then I bid bind him and lead
him away, that we may have a true tale out of him; otherwise let him go
and take his chance; for we will not waste the bread of the Good Town
on him."

The Knight looked hard on Ralph, and spake to him somewhat courteously:

"Whence art thou, fair Sir, and what is thy name? for we have many foes
in the wildwood."

Ralph reddened as he answered:  "I am of Upmeads beyond the down
country; and I pray thee let me be gone on mine errands.  It is meet
that thou deal with thine own robbers and reivers, but not with me."

Then cried out one of the bounden men:  "Thou liest, lad, we be no
robbers." But he of the Knight's company who stood by him smote the man
on the mouth and said:  "Hold thy peace, runagate!  Thou shalt give
tongue to-morrow when the hangman hath thee under his hands."

The Knight took no heed of this; but turned to the ancient warrior and
said: "Hath he spoken truth so far?"

"Yea, Sir Aymer," quoth Oliver; "And now meseems I know him better than
he knoweth me."

Therewith he turned to Ralph and said:  "How fareth Long Nicholas, my
lord?"

Ralph reddened again:  "He is well," said he.

Then said the Knight:  "Is the young man of a worthy house, Oliver?"

But ere the elder could speak, Ralph brake in and said: "Old warrior, I
bid thee not to tell out my name, as thou lovest Nicholas."

Old Oliver laughed and said:  "Well, Nicholas and I have been friends
in a way, as well as foes; and for the sake of the old days his name
shall help thee, young lord." Then he said to his Knight:  "Yea, Sir
Aymer, he is of a goodly house and an ancient; but thou hearest how he
adjureth me.  Ye shall let his name alone."

The Knight looked silently on Ralph for a while; then he said: "Wilt
thou wend with us to the Burg of the Four Friths, fair Sir?  Wert thou
not faring thither?  Or what else dost thou in the Wood Perilous?"

Ralph turned it over in his mind; and though he saw no cause why he
should not join himself to their company, yet something in his heart
forbade him to rise to the fly too eagerly; so he did but say: "I am
seeking adventures, fair lord."

The Knight smiled:  "Then mayst thou fill thy budget with them if thou
goest with us," quoth he.  Now Ralph did not know how he might gainsay
so many men at arms in the long run, though he were scarce willing to
go; so he made no haste to answer; and even therewith came a man
running, through the wood up from the dale; a long, lean carle, meet
for running, with brogues on his feet, and nought else but a shirt; the
company parted before him to right and left to let him come to the
Knight, as though he had been looked for; and when he was beside him,
the Knight leaned down while the carle spake softly to him and all men
drew out of ear-shot.  And when the carle had given his message the
Knight drew himself straight up in his saddle again and lifted up his
hand and cried out:

"Oliver!  Oliver! lead on the way thou wottest!  Spur! spur, all men!"

Therewith he blew one blast from a horn which hung at his saddle-bow;
the runner leapt up behind old Oliver, and the whole company went off
at a smart trot somewhat south-east, slantwise of the cross-roads,
where the wood was nought cumbered with undergrowth; and presently they
were all gone to the last horse-tail, and no man took any more note of
Ralph.



CHAPTER 9

Another Adventure in the Wood Perilous


Ralph left alone pondered a little; and thought that he would by no
means go hastily to the Burg of the Four Friths.  Said he to himself;
This want-way is all unlike to the one near our house at home:  for
belike adventures shall befall here: I will even abide here for an hour
or two; but will have my horse by me and keep awake, lest something hap
to me unawares.

Therewith he whistled for Falcon his horse, and the beast came to him,
and whinnied for love of him, and Ralph smiled and tied him to a
sapling anigh, and himself sat down on the grass, and pondered many
things; as to what folk were about at Upmeads, and how his brethren
were faring; and it was now about five hours after noon, and the sun's
rays fell aslant through the boughs of the noble oaks, and the scent of
the grass and bracken trodden by the horse-hoofs of that company went
up into the warm summer air.  A while he sat musing but awake, though
the faint sound of a little stream in the dale below mingled with all
the lesser noises of the forest did its best to soothe him to sleep
again:  and presently had its way with him; for he leaned his head back
on the bracken, and in a minute or two was sleeping once more and
dreaming some dream made up of masterless memories of past days.

When he awoke again he lay still a little while, wondering where in the
world he was, but as the drowsiness left him, he arose and looked
about, and saw that the sun was sinking low and gilding the oakboles
red.  He stood awhile and watched the gambols of three hares, who had
drawn nigh him while he slept, and now noted him not; and a little way
he saw through the trees a hart and two hinds going slowly from grass
to grass, feeding in the cool eventide; but presently he saw them raise
their heads and amble off down the slope of the little dale, and
therewith he himself turned his face sharply toward the north-west, for
he was fine-eared as well as sharp-eyed, and on a little wind which had
just arisen came down to him the sound of horse-hoofs once more.

So he went up to Falcon and loosed him, and stood by him bridle in
hand, and looked to it that his sword was handy to him: and he
hearkened, and the sound drew nigher and nigher to him.  Then lightly
he got into the saddle and gathered the reins into his left hand, and
sat peering up the trodden wood-glades, lest he should have to ride for
his life suddenly.  Therewith he heard voices talking roughly and a man
whistling, and athwart the glade of the wood from the northwest, or
thereabout, came new folk; and he saw at once that there went two men
a-horseback and armed; so he drew his sword and abode them close to the
want-ways. Presently they saw the shine of his war-gear, and then they
came but a little nigher ere they drew rein, and sat on their horses
looking toward him.  Then Ralph saw that they were armed and clad as
those of the company which had gone before.  One of the armed men rode
a horse-length after his fellow, and bore a long spear over his
shoulder.  But the other who rode first was girt with a sword, and had
a little axe hanging about his neck, and with his right hand he seemed
to be leading something, Ralph could not see what at first, as his left
side was turned toward Ralph and the want-way.

Now, as Ralph looked, he saw that at the spearman's saddle-bow was hung
a man's head, red-haired and red-bearded; for this man now drew a
little nigher, and cried out to Ralph in a loud and merry voice: "Hail,
knight! whither away now, that thou ridest the green-wood sword in
hand?"

Ralph was just about to answer somewhat, when the first man moved a
little nigher, and as he did so he turned so that Ralph could see what
betid on his right hand; and lo! he was leading a woman by a rope tied
about her neck (though her hands were loose), as though he were
bringing a cow to market.  When the man stayed his horse she came
forward and stood within the slack of the rope by the horse's head, and
Ralph could see her well, that though she was not to say naked, her
raiment was but scanty, for she had nought to cover her save one short
and strait little coat of linen, and shoes on her feet.  Yet Ralph
deemed her to be of some degree, whereas he caught the gleam of gold
and gems on her hands, and there was a golden chaplet on her head.  She
stood now by the horse's head with her hands folded, looking on, as if
what was tiding and to betide, were but a play done for her pleasure.

So when Ralph looked on her, he was silent a while; and the spearman
cried out again:  "Ho, young man, wilt thou speak, or art thou
dumb-foundered for fear of us?"

But Ralph knit his brows, and was first red and then pale; for he was
both wroth, and doubtful how to go to work; but he said:

"I ride to seek adventures; and here meseemeth is one come to hand.  Or
what will ye with the woman?"

Said the man who had the woman in tow:  "Trouble not thine head
therewith; we lead her to her due doom.  As for thee, be glad that thou
art not her fellow; since forsooth thou seemest not to be one of them;
so go thy ways in peace."

"No foot further will I go," said Ralph, "till ye loose the woman and
let her go; or else tell me what her worst deed is."

The man laughed, and said:  "That were a long tale to tell; and it is
little like that thou shalt live to hear the ending thereof."

Therewith he wagged his head at the spearman, who suddenly let his
spear fall into the rest, and spurred, and drave on at Ralph all he
might.  There and then had the tale ended, but Ralph, who was wary,
though he were young, and had Falcon well in hand, turned his wrist and
made the horse swerve, so that the man-at-arms missed his attaint, but
could not draw rein speedily enough to stay his horse; and as he passed
by all bowed over his horse's neck, Ralph gat his sword two-handed and
rose in his stirrups and smote his mightiest; and the sword caught the
foeman on the neck betwixt sallet and jack, and nought held before it,
neither leather nor ring-mail, so that the man's head was nigh smitten
off, and he fell clattering from his saddle: yet his stirrups held him,
so that his horse went dragging him on earth as he gallopped over rough
and smooth betwixt the trees of the forest.  Then Ralph turned about to
deal with his fellow, and even through the wrath and fury of the
slaying saw him clear and bright against the trees as he sat handling
his axe doubtfully, but the woman was fallen back again somewhat.

But even as Ralph raised his sword and pricked forward, the woman
sprang as light as a leopard on to the saddle behind the foeman, and
wound her arms about him and dragged him back just as he was raising
his axe to smite her, and as Ralph rode forward she cried out to him,
"Smite him, smite!  O lovely creature of God!"

Therewith was Ralph beside them, and though he were loth to slay a man
held in the arms of a woman, yet he feared lest the man should slay her
with some knife-stroke unless he made haste; so he thrust his sword
through him, and the man died at once, and fell headlong off his horse,
dragging down the woman with him.

Then Ralph lighted down from his horse, and the woman rose up to him,
her white smock all bloody with the slain man.  Nevertheless was she as
calm and stately before him, as if she were sitting on the dais of a
fair hall; so she said to him:

"Young warrior, thou hast done well and knightly, and I shall look to
it that thou have thy reward.  And now I rede thee go not to the Burg
of the Four Friths; for this tale of thee shall get about and they
shall take thee, if it were out of the very Frith-stool, and there for
thee should be the scourge and the gibbet; for they of that Burg be
robbers and murderers merciless.  Yet well it were that thou ride hence
presently; for those be behind my tormentors whom thou hast slain, who
will be as an host to thee, and thou mayst not deal with them.  If thou
follow my rede, thou wilt take the way that goeth hence east away, and
then shalt thou come to Hampton under Scaur, where the folk are
peaceable and friendly."

He looked at her hard as she spake, and noted that she spake but
slowly, and turned red and white and red again as she looked at him.
But whatever she did, and in spite of her poor attire, he deemed he had
never seen woman so fair.  Her hair was dark red, but her eyes grey,
and light at whiles and yet at whiles deep; her lips betwixt thin and
full, but yet when she spoke or smiled clad with all enticements; her
chin round and so wrought as none was ever better wrought; her body
strong and well-knit; tall she was, with fair and large arms, and limbs
most goodly of fashion, of which but little was hidden, since her coat
was but thin and scanty.  But whatever may be said of her, no man would
have deemed her aught save most lovely.  Now her face grew calm and
stately again as it was at the first, and she laid a hand on Ralph's
shoulder, and smiled in his face and said:

"Surely thou art fair, though thy strokes be not light." Then she took
his hand and caressed it, and said again: "Dost thou deem that thou
hast done great things, fair child?  Maybe.  Yet some will say that
thou hast but slain two butchers:  and if thou wilt say that thou hast
delivered me; yet it may be that I should have delivered myself ere
long.  Nevertheless hold up thine heart, for I think that greater
things await thee."

Then she turned about, and saw the dead man, how his feet yet hung in
the stirrups as his fellow's had done, save that the horse of this one
stood nigh still, only reaching his head down to crop a mouthful of
grass; so she said: "Take him away, that I may mount on his horse."

So he drew the dead man's feet out of the stirrups, and dragged him
away to where the bracken grew deep, and laid him down there, so to say
hidden.  Then he turned back to the lady, who was pacing up and down
near the horse as the beast fed quietly on the cool grass.  When Ralph
came back she took the reins in her hand and put one foot in the
stirrup as if she would mount at once; but suddenly lighted down again,
and turning to Ralph, cast her arms about him, and kissed his face many
times, blushing red as a rose meantime.  Then lightly she gat her up
into the saddle, and bestrode the beast, and smote his flanks with her
heels, and went her ways riding speedily toward the south-east, so that
she was soon out of sight.

But Ralph stood still looking the way she had gone and wondering at the
adventure; and he pondered her words and held debate with himself
whether he should take the road she bade him.  And he said within
himself: "Hitherto have I been safe and have got no scratch of a weapon
upon me, and this is a place by seeming for all adventures; and little
way moreover shall I make in the night if I must needs go to Hampton
under Scaur, where dwell those peaceable people; and it is now growing
dusk already.  So I will abide the morning hereby; but I will be wary
and let the wood cover me if I may."

Therewith he went and drew the body of the slain man down into a little
hollow where the bracken was high and the brambles grew strong, so that
it might not be lightly seen.  Then he called to him Falcon, his horse,
and looked about for cover anigh the want-way, and found a little thin
coppice of hazel and sweet chestnut, just where two great oaks had been
felled a half score years ago; and looking through the leaves thence,
he could see the four ways clearly enough, though it would not be easy
for anyone to see him thence.

Thither he betook him, and he did the rein off Falcon, but tethered him
by a halter in the thickest of the copse, and