The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Haunted Hotel: A Mystery of Modern Venice
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Haunted Hotel: A Mystery of Modern Venice

Author: Wilkie Collins


        
Release date: October 1, 1994 [eBook #170]
                Most recently updated: June 21, 2025

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/170


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HAUNTED HOTEL: A MYSTERY OF MODERN VENICE ***
THE HAUNTED HOTEL


A Mystery of Modern Venice


by Wilkie Collins (1824–1889)

(after the edition of Chatto & Windus, London, 1879)




CONTENTS

THE FIRST PART
CHAPTER I
CHAPTER II
CHAPTER III
CHAPTER IV

THE SECOND PART
CHAPTER V
CHAPTER VI
CHAPTER VII
CHAPTER VIII
CHAPTER IX
CHAPTER X
CHAPTER XI
CHAPTER XII

THE THIRD PART
CHAPTER XIII
CHAPTER XIV
CHAPTER XV

THE FOURTH PART
CHAPTER XVI
CHAPTER XVII
CHAPTER XVIII
CHAPTER XIX
CHAPTER XX
CHAPTER XXI
CHAPTER XXII
CHAPTER XXIII
CHAPTER XXIV
CHAPTER XXV
CHAPTER XXVI
CHAPTER XXVII
CHAPTER XXVIII
POSTSCRIPT




THE FIRST PART




CHAPTER I


In the year 1860, the reputation of Doctor Wybrow as a London physician
reached its highest point. It was reported on good authority that he
was in receipt of one of the largest incomes derived from the practice
of medicine in modern times.

One afternoon, towards the close of the London season, the Doctor had
just taken his luncheon after a specially hard morning’s work in his
consulting-room, and with a formidable list of visits to patients at
their own houses to fill up the rest of his day—when the servant
announced that a lady wished to speak to him.

“Who is she?” the Doctor asked. “A stranger?”

“Yes, sir.”

“I see no strangers out of consulting-hours. Tell her what the hours
are, and send her away.”

“I have told her, sir.”

“Well?”

“And she won’t go.”

“Won’t go?” The Doctor smiled as he repeated the words. He was a
humourist in his way; and there was an absurd side to the situation
which rather amused him. “Has this obstinate lady given you her name?”
he inquired.

“No, sir. She refused to give any name—she said she wouldn’t keep you
five minutes, and the matter was too important to wait till to-morrow.
There she is in the consulting-room; and how to get her out again is
more than I know.”

Doctor Wybrow considered for a moment. His knowledge of women
(professionally speaking) rested on the ripe experience of more than
thirty years; he had met with them in all their varieties—especially
the variety which knows nothing of the value of time, and never
hesitates at sheltering itself behind the privileges of its sex. A
glance at his watch informed him that he must soon begin his rounds
among the patients who were waiting for him at their own houses. He
decided forthwith on taking the only wise course that was open under
the circumstances. In other words, he decided on taking to flight.

“Is the carriage at the door?” he asked.

“Yes, sir.”

“Very well. Open the house-door for me without making any noise, and
leave the lady in undisturbed possession of the consulting-room. When
she gets tired of waiting, you know what to tell her. If she asks when
I am expected to return, say that I dine at my club, and spend the
evening at the theatre. Now then, softly, Thomas! If your shoes creak,
I am a lost man.”

He noiselessly led the way into the hall, followed by the servant on
tip-toe.

Did the lady in the consulting-room suspect him? or did Thomas’s shoes
creak, and was her sense of hearing unusually keen? Whatever the
explanation may be, the event that actually happened was beyond all
doubt. Exactly as Doctor Wybrow passed his consulting-room, the door
opened—the lady appeared on the threshold—and laid her hand on his arm.

“I entreat you, sir, not to go away without letting me speak to you
first.”

The accent was foreign; the tone was low and firm. Her fingers closed
gently, and yet resolutely, on the Doctor’s arm.

Neither her language nor her action had the slightest effect in
inclining him to grant her request. The influence that instantly
stopped him, on the way to his carriage, was the silent influence of
her face. The startling contrast between the corpse-like pallor of her
complexion and the overpowering life and light, the glittering metallic
brightness in her large black eyes, held him literally spell-bound. She
was dressed in dark colours, with perfect taste; she was of middle
height, and (apparently) of middle age—say a year or two over thirty.
Her lower features—the nose, mouth, and chin—possessed the fineness and
delicacy of form which is oftener seen among women of foreign races
than among women of English birth. She was unquestionably a handsome
person—with the one serious drawback of her ghastly complexion, and
with the less noticeable defect of a total want of tenderness in the
expression of her eyes. Apart from his first emotion of surprise, the
feeling she produced in the Doctor may be described as an overpowering
feeling of professional curiosity. The case might prove to be something
entirely new in his professional experience. “It looks like it,” he
thought; “and it’s worth waiting for.”

She perceived that she had produced a strong impression of some kind
upon him, and dropped her hold on his arm.

“You have comforted many miserable women in your time,” she said.
“Comfort one more, to-day.”

Without waiting to be answered, she led the way back into the room.

The Doctor followed her, and closed the door. He placed her in the
patients’ chair, opposite the windows. Even in London the sun, on that
summer afternoon, was dazzlingly bright. The radiant light flowed in on
her. Her eyes met it unflinchingly, with the steely steadiness of the
eyes of an eagle. The smooth pallor of her unwrinkled skin looked more
fearfully white than ever. For the first time, for many a long year
past, the Doctor felt his pulse quicken its beat in the presence of a
patient.

Having possessed herself of his attention, she appeared, strangely
enough, to have nothing to say to him. A curious apathy seemed to have
taken possession of this resolute woman. Forced to speak first, the
Doctor merely inquired, in the conventional phrase, what he could do
for her.

The sound of his voice seemed to rouse her. Still looking straight at
the light, she said abruptly: “I have a painful question to ask.”

“What is it?”

Her eyes travelled slowly from the window to the Doctor’s face. Without
the slightest outward appearance of agitation, she put the “painful
question” in these extraordinary words:

“I want to know, if you please, whether I am in danger of going mad?”

Some men might have been amused, and some might have been alarmed.
Doctor Wybrow was only conscious of a sense of disappointment. Was this
the rare case that he had anticipated, judging rashly by appearances?
Was the new patient only a hypochondriacal woman, whose malady was a
disordered stomach and whose misfortune was a weak brain? “Why do you
come to _me?_” he asked sharply. “Why don’t you consult a doctor whose
special employment is the treatment of the insane?”

She had her answer ready on the instant.

“I don’t go to a doctor of that sort,” she said, “for the very reason
that he _is_ a specialist: he has the fatal habit of judging everybody
by lines and rules of his own laying down. I come to _you_, because my
case is outside of all lines and rules, and because you are famous in
your profession for the discovery of mysteries in disease. Are you
satisfied?”

He was more than satisfied—his first idea had been the right idea,
after all. Besides, she was correctly informed as to his professional
position. The capacity which had raised him to fame and fortune was his
capacity (unrivalled among his brethren) for the discovery of remote
disease.

“I am at your disposal,” he answered. “Let me try if I can find out
what is the matter with you.”

He put his medical questions. They were promptly and plainly answered;
and they led to no other conclusion than that the strange lady was,
mentally and physically, in excellent health. Not satisfied with
questions, he carefully examined the great organs of life. Neither his
hand nor his stethoscope could discover anything that was amiss. With
the admirable patience and devotion to his art which had distinguished
him from the time when he was a student, he still subjected her to one
test after another. The result was always the same. Not only was there
no tendency to brain disease—there was not even a perceptible
derangement of the nervous system. “I can find nothing the matter with
you,” he said. “I can’t even account for the extraordinary pallor of
your complexion. You completely puzzle me.”

“The pallor of my complexion is nothing,” she answered a little
impatiently. “In my early life I had a narrow escape from death by
poisoning. I have never had a complexion since—and my skin is so
delicate, I cannot paint without producing a hideous rash. But that is
of no importance. I wanted your opinion given positively. I believed in
you, and you have disappointed me.” Her head dropped on her breast.
“And so it ends!” she said to herself bitterly.

The Doctor’s sympathies were touched. Perhaps it might be more correct
to say that his professional pride was a little hurt. “It may end in
the right way yet,” he remarked, “if you choose to help me.”

She looked up again with flashing eyes, “Speak plainly,” she said. “How
can I help you?”

“Plainly, madam, you come to me as an enigma, and you leave me to make
the right guess by the unaided efforts of my art. My art will do much,
but not all. For example, something must have occurred—something quite
unconnected with the state of your bodily health—to frighten you about
yourself, or you would never have come here to consult me. Is that
true?”

She clasped her hands in her lap. “That is true!” she said eagerly. “I
begin to believe in you again.”

“Very well. You can’t expect me to find out the moral cause which has
alarmed you. I can positively discover that there is no physical cause
of alarm; and (unless you admit me to your confidence) I can do no
more.”

She rose, and took a turn in the room. “Suppose I tell you?” she said.
“But, mind, I shall mention no names!”

“There is no need to mention names. The facts are all I want.”

“The facts are nothing,” she rejoined. “I have only my own impressions
to confess—and you will very likely think me a fanciful fool when you
hear what they are. No matter. I will do my best to content you—I will
begin with the facts that you want. Take my word for it, _they_ won’t
do much to help you.”

She sat down again. In the plainest possible words, she began the
strangest and wildest confession that had ever reached the Doctor’s
ears.




CHAPTER II


“It is one fact, sir, that I am a widow,” she said. “It is another
fact, that I am going to be married again.”

There she paused, and smiled at some thought that occurred to her.
Doctor Wybrow was not favourably impressed by her smile—there was
something at once sad and cruel in it. It came slowly, and it went away
suddenly. He began to doubt whether he had been wise in acting on his
first impression. His mind reverted to the commonplace patients and the
discoverable maladies that were waiting for him, with a certain tender
regret.

The lady went on.

“My approaching marriage,” she said, “has one embarrassing circumstance
connected with it. The gentleman whose wife I am to be, was engaged to
another lady when he happened to meet with me, abroad: that lady, mind,
being of his own blood and family, related to him as his cousin. I have
innocently robbed her of her lover, and destroyed her prospects in
life. Innocently, I say—because he told me nothing of his engagement
until after I had accepted him. When we next met in England—and when
there was danger, no doubt, of the affair coming to my knowledge—he
told me the truth. I was naturally indignant. He had his excuse ready;
he showed me a letter from the lady herself, releasing him from his
engagement. A more noble, a more high-minded letter, I never read in my
life. I cried over it—I who have no tears in me for sorrows of my own!
If the letter had left him any hope of being forgiven, I would have
positively refused to marry him. But the firmness of it—without anger,
without a word of reproach, with heartfelt wishes even for his
happiness—the firmness of it, I say, left him no hope. He appealed to
my compassion; he appealed to his love for me. You know what women are.
I too was soft-hearted—I said, Very well: yes! In a week more (I
tremble as I think of it) we are to be married.”

She did really tremble—she was obliged to pause and compose herself,
before she could go on. The Doctor, waiting for more facts, began to
fear that he stood committed to a long story. “Forgive me for reminding
you that I have suffering persons waiting to see me,” he said. “The
sooner you can come to the point, the better for my patients and for
me.”

The strange smile—at once so sad and so cruel—showed itself again on
the lady’s lips. “Every word I have said is to the point,” she
answered. “You will see it yourself in a moment more.”

She resumed her narrative.

“Yesterday—you need fear no long story, sir; only yesterday—I was among
the visitors at one of your English luncheon parties. A lady, a perfect
stranger to me, came in late—after we had left the table, and had
retired to the drawing-room. She happened to take a chair near me; and
we were presented to each other. I knew her by name, as she knew me. It
was the woman whom I had robbed of her lover, the woman who had written
the noble letter. Now listen! You were impatient with me for not
interesting you in what I said just now. I said it to satisfy your mind
that I had no enmity of feeling towards the lady, on my side. I admired
her, I felt for her—I had no cause to reproach myself. This is very
important, as you will presently see. On her side, I have reason to be
assured that the circumstances had been truly explained to her, and
that she understood I was in no way to blame. Now, knowing all these
necessary things as you do, explain to me, if you can, why, when I rose
and met that woman’s eyes looking at me, I turned cold from head to
foot, and shuddered, and shivered, and knew what a deadly panic of fear
was, for the first time in my life.”

The Doctor began to feel interested at last.

“Was there anything remarkable in the lady’s personal appearance?” he
asked.

“Nothing whatever!” was the vehement reply. “Here is the true
description of her:—The ordinary English lady; the clear cold blue
eyes, the fine rosy complexion, the inanimately polite manner, the
large good-humoured mouth, the too plump cheeks and chin: these, and
nothing more.”

“Was there anything in her expression, when you first looked at her,
that took you by surprise?”

“There was natural curiosity to see the woman who had been preferred to
her; and perhaps some astonishment also, not to see a more engaging and
more beautiful person; both those feelings restrained within the limits
of good breeding, and both not lasting for more than a few moments—so
far as I could see. I say, ‘so far,’ because the horrible agitation
that she communicated to me disturbed my judgment. If I could have got
to the door, I would have run out of the room, she frightened me so! I
was not even able to stand up—I sank back in my chair; I stared
horror-struck at the calm blue eyes that were only looking at me with a
gentle surprise. To say they affected me like the eyes of a serpent is
to say nothing. I felt her soul in them, looking into mine—looking, if
such a thing can be, unconsciously to her own mortal self. I tell you
my impression, in all its horror and in all its folly! That woman is
destined (without knowing it herself) to be the evil genius of my life.
Her innocent eyes saw hidden capabilities of wickedness in me that I
was not aware of myself, until I felt them stirring under her look. If
I commit faults in my life to come—if I am even guilty of crimes—she
will bring the retribution, without (as I firmly believe) any conscious
exercise of her own will. In one indescribable moment I felt all
this—and I suppose my face showed it. The good artless creature was
inspired by a sort of gentle alarm for me. ‘I am afraid the heat of the
room is too much for you; will you try my smelling bottle?’ I heard her
say those kind words; and I remember nothing else—I fainted. When I
recovered my senses, the company had all gone; only the lady of the
house was with me. For the moment I could say nothing to her; the
dreadful impression that I have tried to describe to you came back to
me with the coming back of my life. As soon I could speak, I implored
her to tell me the whole truth about the woman whom I had supplanted.
You see, I had a faint hope that her good character might not really be
deserved, that her noble letter was a skilful piece of hypocrisy—in
short, that she secretly hated me, and was cunning enough to hide it.
No! the lady had been her friend from her girlhood, was as familiar
with her as if they had been sisters—knew her positively to be as good,
as innocent, as incapable of hating anybody, as the greatest saint that
ever lived. My one last hope, that I had only felt an ordinary
forewarning of danger in the presence of an ordinary enemy, was a hope
destroyed for ever. There was one more effort I could make, and I made
it. I went next to the man whom I am to marry. I implored him to
release me from my promise. He refused. I declared I would break my
engagement. He showed me letters from his sisters, letters from his
brothers, and his dear friends—all entreating him to think again before
he made me his wife; all repeating reports of me in Paris, Vienna, and
London, which are so many vile lies. ‘If you refuse to marry me,’ he
said, ‘you admit that these reports are true—you admit that you are
afraid to face society in the character of my wife.’ What could I
answer? There was no contradicting him—he was plainly right: if I
persisted in my refusal, the utter destruction of my reputation would
be the result. I consented to let the wedding take place as we had
arranged it—and left him. The night has passed. I am here, with my
fixed conviction—that innocent woman is ordained to have a fatal
influence over my life. I am here with my one question to put, to the
one man who can answer it. For the last time, sir, what am I—a demon
who has seen the avenging angel? or only a poor mad woman, misled by
the delusion of a deranged mind?”

Doctor Wybrow rose from his chair, determined to close the interview.

He was strongly and painfully impressed by what he had heard. The
longer he had listened to her, the more irresistibly the conviction of
the woman’s wickedness had forced itself on him. He tried vainly to
think of her as a person to be pitied—a person with a morbidly
sensitive imagination, conscious of the capacities for evil which lie
dormant in us all, and striving earnestly to open her heart to the
counter-influence of her own better nature; the effort was beyond him.
A perverse instinct in him said, as if in words, Beware how you believe
in her!

“I have already given you my opinion,” he said. “There is no sign of
your intellect being deranged, or being likely to be deranged, that
medical science can discover—as _I_ understand it. As for the
impressions you have confided to me, I can only say that yours is a
case (as I venture to think) for spiritual rather than for medical
advice. Of one thing be assured: what you have said to me in this room
shall not pass out of it. Your confession is safe in my keeping.”

She heard him, with a certain dogged resignation, to the end.

“Is that all?” she asked.

“That is all,” he answered.

She put a little paper packet of money on the table. “Thank you, sir.
There is your fee.”

With those words she rose. Her wild black eyes looked upward, with an
expression of despair so defiant and so horrible in its silent agony
that the Doctor turned away his head, unable to endure the sight of it.
The bare idea of taking anything from her—not money only, but anything
even that she had touched—suddenly revolted him. Still without looking
at her, he said, “Take it back; I don’t want my fee.”

She neither heeded nor heard him. Still looking upward, she said slowly
to herself, “Let the end come. I have done with the struggle: I
submit.”

She drew her veil over her face, bowed to the Doctor, and left the
room.

He rang the bell, and followed her into the hall. As the servant closed
the door on her, a sudden impulse of curiosity—utterly unworthy of him,
and at the same time utterly irresistible—sprang up in the Doctor’s
mind. Blushing like a boy, he said to the servant, “Follow her home,
and find out her name.” For one moment the man looked at his master,
doubting if his own ears had not deceived him. Doctor Wybrow looked
back at him in silence. The submissive servant knew what that silence
meant—he took his hat and hurried into the street.

The Doctor went back to the consulting-room. A sudden revulsion of
feeling swept over his mind. Had the woman left an infection of
wickedness in the house, and had he caught it? What devil had possessed
him to degrade himself in the eyes of his own servant? He had behaved
infamously—he had asked an honest man, a man who had served him
faithfully for years, to turn spy! Stung by the bare thought of it, he
ran out into the hall again, and opened the door. The servant had
disappeared; it was too late to call him back. But one refuge from his
contempt for himself was now open to him—the refuge of work. He got
into his carriage and went his rounds among his patients.

If the famous physician could have shaken his own reputation, he would
have done it that afternoon. Never before had he made himself so little
welcome at the bedside. Never before had he put off until to-morrow the
prescription which ought to have been written, the opinion which ought
to have been given, to-day. He went home earlier than usual—unutterably
dissatisfied with himself.

The servant had returned. Dr. Wybrow was ashamed to question him. The
man reported the result of his errand, without waiting to be asked.

“The lady’s name is the Countess Narona. She lives at—”

Without waiting to hear where she lived, the Doctor acknowledged the
all-important discovery of her name by a silent bend of the head, and
entered his consulting-room. The fee that he had vainly refused still
lay in its little white paper covering on the table. He sealed it up in
an envelope; addressed it to the “Poor-box” of the nearest
police-court; and, calling the servant in, directed him to take it to
the magistrate the next morning. Faithful to his duties, the servant
waited to ask the customary question, “Do you dine at home to-day,
sir?”

After a moment’s hesitation he said, “No: I shall dine at the club.”

The most easily deteriorated of all the moral qualities is the quality
called “conscience.” In one state of a man’s mind, his conscience is
the severest judge that can pass sentence on him. In another state, he
and his conscience are on the best possible terms with each other in
the comfortable capacity of accomplices. When Doctor Wybrow left his
house for the second time, he did not even attempt to conceal from
himself that his sole object, in dining at the club, was to hear what
the world said of the Countess Narona.




CHAPTER III


There was a time when a man in search of the pleasures of gossip sought
the society of ladies. The man knows better now. He goes to the
smoking-room of his club.

Doctor Wybrow lit his cigar, and looked round him at his brethren in
social conclave assembled. The room was well filled; but the flow of
talk was still languid. The Doctor innocently applied the stimulant
that was wanted. When he inquired if anybody knew the Countess Narona,
he was answered by something like a shout of astonishment. Never (the
conclave agreed) had such an absurd question been asked before! Every
human creature, with the slightest claim to a place in society, knew
the Countess Narona. An adventuress with a European reputation of the
blackest possible colour—such was the general description of the woman
with the deathlike complexion and the glittering eyes.

Descending to particulars, each member of the club contributed his own
little stock of scandal to the memoirs of the Countess. It was doubtful
whether she was really, what she called herself, a Dalmatian lady. It
was doubtful whether she had ever been married to the Count whose widow
she assumed to be. It was doubtful whether the man who accompanied her
in her travels (under the name of Baron Rivar, and in the character of
her brother) was her brother at all. Report pointed to the Baron as a
gambler at every “table” on the Continent. Report whispered that his
so-called sister had narrowly escaped being implicated in a famous
trial for poisoning at Vienna—that she had been known at Milan as a spy
in the interests of Austria—that her “apartment” in Paris had been
denounced to the police as nothing less than a private
gambling-house—and that her present appearance in England was the
natural result of the discovery. Only one member of the assembly in the
smoking-room took the part of this much-abused woman, and declared that
her character had been most cruelly and most unjustly assailed. But as
the man was a lawyer, his interference went for nothing: it was
naturally attributed to the spirit of contradiction inherent in his
profession. He was asked derisively what he thought of the
circumstances under which the Countess had become engaged to be
married; and he made the characteristic answer, that he thought the
circumstances highly creditable to both parties, and that he looked on
the lady’s future husband as a most enviable man.

Hearing this, the Doctor raised another shout of astonishment by
inquiring the name of the gentleman whom the Countess was about to
marry.

His friends in the smoking-room decided unanimously that the celebrated
physician must be a second “Rip-van-Winkle,” and that he had just
awakened from a supernatural sleep of twenty years. It was all very
well to say that he was devoted to his profession, and that he had
neither time nor inclination to pick up fragments of gossip at
dinner-parties and balls. A man who did not know that the Countess
Narona had borrowed money at Homburg of no less a person than Lord
Montbarry, and had then deluded him into making her a proposal of
marriage, was a man who had probably never heard of Lord Montbarry
himself. The younger members of the club, humouring the joke, sent a
waiter for the “Peerage”; and read aloud the memoir of the nobleman in
question, for the Doctor’s benefit—with illustrative morsels of
information interpolated by themselves.

“Herbert John Westwick. First Baron Montbarry, of Montbarry, King’s
County, Ireland. Created a Peer for distinguished military services in
India. Born, 1812. Forty-eight years old, Doctor, at the present time.
Not married. Will be married next week, Doctor, to the delightful
creature we have been talking about. Heir presumptive, his lordship’s
next brother, Stephen Robert, married to Ella, youngest daughter of the
Reverend Silas Marden, Rector of Runnigate, and has issue, three
daughters. Younger brothers of his lordship, Francis and Henry,
unmarried. Sisters of his lordship, Lady Barville, married to Sir
Theodore Barville, Bart.; and Anne, widow of the late Peter Norbury,
Esq., of Norbury Cross. Bear his lordship’s relations well in mind,
Doctor. Three brothers Westwick, Stephen, Francis, and Henry; and two
sisters, Lady Barville and Mrs. Norbury. Not one of the five will be
present at the marriage; and not one of the five will leave a stone
unturned to stop it, if the Countess will only give them a chance. Add
to these hostile members of the family another offended relative not
mentioned in the “Peerage,” a young lady—”

A sudden outburst of protest in more than one part of the room stopped
the coming disclosure, and released the Doctor from further
persecution.

“Don’t mention the poor girl’s name; it’s too bad to make a joke of
that part of the business; she has behaved nobly under shameful
provocation; there is but one excuse for Montbarry—he is either a
madman or a fool.” In these terms the protest expressed itself on all
sides. Speaking confidentially to his next neighbour, the Doctor
discovered that the lady referred to was already known to him (through
the Countess’s confession) as the lady deserted by Lord Montbarry. Her
name was Agnes Lockwood. She was described as being the superior of the
Countess in personal attraction, and as being also by some years the
younger woman of the two. Making all allowance for the follies that men
committed every day in their relations with women, Montbarry’s delusion
was still the most monstrous delusion on record. In this expression of
opinion every man present agreed—the lawyer even included. Not one of
them could call to mind the innumerable instances in which the sexual
influence has proved irresistible in the persons of women without even
the pretension to beauty. The very members of the club whom the
Countess (in spite of her personal disadvantages) could have most
easily fascinated, if she had thought it worth her while, were the
members who wondered most loudly at Montbarry’s choice of a wife.

While the topic of the Countess’s marriage was still the one topic of
conversation, a member of the club entered the smoking-room whose
appearance instantly produced a dead silence. Doctor Wybrow’s next
neighbour whispered to him, “Montbarry’s brother—Henry Westwick!”

The new-comer looked round him slowly, with a bitter smile.

“You are all talking of my brother,” he said. “Don’t mind me. Not one
of you can despise him more heartily than I do. Go on, gentlemen—go
on!”

But one man present took the speaker at his word. That man was the
lawyer who had already undertaken the defence of the Countess.

“I stand alone in my opinion,” he said, “and I am not ashamed of
repeating it in anybody’s hearing. I consider the Countess Narona to be
a cruelly-treated woman. Why shouldn’t she be Lord Montbarry’s wife?
Who can say she has a mercenary motive in marrying him?”

Montbarry’s brother turned sharply on the speaker. “_I_ say it!” he
answered.

The reply might have shaken some men. The lawyer stood on his ground as
firmly as ever.

“I believe I am right,” he rejoined, “in stating that his lordship’s
income is not more than sufficient to support his station in life; also
that it is an income derived almost entirely from landed property in
Ireland, every acre of which is entailed.”

Montbarry’s brother made a sign, admitting that he had no objection to
offer so far.

“If his lordship dies first,” the lawyer proceeded, “I have been
informed that the only provision he can make for his widow consists in
a rent-charge on the property of no more than four hundred a year. His
retiring pension and allowances, it is well known, die with him. Four
hundred a year is therefore all that he can leave to the Countess, if
he leaves her a widow.”

“Four hundred a year is _not_ all,” was the reply to this. “My brother
has insured his life for ten thousand pounds; and he has settled the
whole of it on the Countess, in the event of his death.”

This announcement produced a strong sensation. Men looked at each
other, and repeated the three startling words, “Ten thousand pounds!”
Driven fairly to the wall, the lawyer made a last effort to defend his
position.

“May I ask who made that settlement a condition of the marriage?” he
said. “Surely it was not the Countess herself?.”

Henry Westwick answered, “It was the Countess’s brother”; and added,
“which comes to the same thing.”

After that, there was no more to be said—so long, at least, as
Montbarry’s brother was present. The talk flowed into other channels;
and the Doctor went home.

But his morbid curiosity about the Countess was not set at rest yet. In
his leisure moments he found himself wondering whether Lord Montbarry’s
family would succeed in stopping the marriage after all. And more than
this, he was conscious of a growing desire to see the infatuated man
himself. Every day during the brief interval before the wedding, he
looked in at the club, on the chance of hearing some news. Nothing had
happened, so far as the club knew. The Countess’s position was secure;
Montbarry’s resolution to be her husband was unshaken. They were both
Roman Catholics, and they were to be married at the —el in Spanish
Place. So much the Doctor discovered about them—and no more.

On the day of the wedding, after a feeble struggle with himself, he
actually sacrificed his patients and their guineas, and slipped away
secretly to see the marriage. To the end of his life, he was angry with
anybody who reminded him of what he had done on that day!

The wedding was strictly private. A close carriage stood at the church
door; a few people, mostly of the lower class, and mostly old women,
were scattered about the interior of the building. Here and there
Doctor Wybrow detected the faces of some of his brethren of the club,
attracted by curiosity, like himself. Four persons only stood before
the altar—the bride and bridegroom and their two witnesses. One of
these last was an elderly woman, who might have been the Countess’s
companion or maid; the other was undoubtedly her brother, Baron Rivar.
The bridal party (the bride herself included) wore their ordinary
morning costume. Lord Montbarry, personally viewed, was a middle-aged
military man of the ordinary type: nothing in the least remarkable
distinguished him either in face or figure. Baron Rivar, again, in his
way was another conventional representative of another well-known type.
One sees his finely-pointed moustache, his bold eyes, his
crisply-curling hair, and his dashing carriage of the head, repeated
hundreds of times over on the Boulevards of Paris. The only noteworthy
point about him was of the negative sort—he was not in the least like
his sister. Even the officiating priest was only a harmless,
humble-looking old man, who went through his duties resignedly, and
felt visible rheumatic difficulties every time he bent his knees. The
one remarkable person, the Countess herself, only raised her veil at
the beginning of the ceremony, and presented nothing in her plain dress
that was worth a second look. Never, on the face of it, was there a
less interesting and less romantic marriage than this. From time to
time the Doctor glanced round at the door or up at the galleries,
vaguely anticipating the appearance of some protesting stranger, in
possession of some terrible secret, commissioned to forbid the progress
of the service. Nothing in the shape of an event occurred—nothing
extraordinary, nothing dramatic. Bound fast together as man and wife,
the two disappeared, followed by their witnesses, to sign the
registers; and still Doctor Wybrow waited, and still he cherished the
obstinate hope that something worth seeing must certainly happen yet.

The interval passed, and the married couple, returning to the church,
walked together down the nave to the door. Doctor Wybrow drew back as
they approached. To his confusion and surprise, the Countess discovered
him. He heard her say to her husband, “One moment; I see a friend.”
Lord Montbarry bowed and waited. She stepped up to the Doctor, took his
hand, and wrung it hard. He felt her overpowering black eyes looking at
him through her veil. “One step more, you see, on the way to the end!”
She whispered those strange words, and returned to her husband. Before
the Doctor could recover himself and follow her, Lord and Lady
Montbarry had stepped into their carriage, and had driven away.

Outside the church door stood the three or four members of the club
who, like Doctor Wybrow, had watched the ceremony out of curiosity.
Near them was the bride’s brother, waiting alone. He was evidently bent
on seeing the man whom his sister had spoken to, in broad daylight. His
bold eyes rested on the Doctor’s face, with a momentary flash of
suspicion in them. The cloud suddenly cleared away; the Baron smiled
with charming courtesy, lifted his hat to his sister’s friend, and
walked off.

The members constituted themselves into a club conclave on the church
steps. They began with the Baron. “Damned ill-looking rascal!” They
went on with Montbarry. “Is he going to take that horrid woman with him
to Ireland?” “Not he! he can’t face the tenantry; they know about Agnes
Lockwood.” “Well, but where _is_ he going?” “To Scotland.” “Does _she_
like that?” “It’s only for a fortnight; they come back to London, and
go abroad.” “And they will never return to England, eh?” “Who can tell?
Did you see how she looked at Montbarry, when she had to lift her veil
at the beginning of the service? In his place, I should have bolted.
Did _you_ see her, Doctor?” By this time, Doctor Wybrow had remembered
his patients, and had heard enough of the club gossip. He followed the
example of Baron Rivar, and walked off.

“One step more, you see, on the way to the end,” he repeated to
himself, on his way home. “What end?”




CHAPTER IV


On the day of the marriage Agnes Lockwood sat alone in the little
drawing-room of her London lodgings, burning the letters which had been
written to her by Montbarry in the bygone time.

The Countess’s maliciously smart description of her, addressed to
Doctor Wybrow, had not even hinted at the charm that most distinguished
Agnes—the artless expression of goodness and purity which instantly
attracted everyone who approached her. She looked by many years younger
than she really was. With her fair complexion and her shy manner, it
seemed only natural to speak of her as “a girl,” although she was now
really advancing towards thirty years of age. She lived alone with an
old nurse devoted to her, on a modest little income which was just
enough to support the two. There were none of the ordinary signs of
grief in her face, as she slowly tore the letters of her false lover in
two, and threw the pieces into the small fire which had been lit to
consume them. Unhappily for herself, she was one of those women who
feel too deeply to find relief in tears. Pale and quiet, with cold
trembling fingers, she destroyed the letters one by one without daring
to read them again. She had torn the last of the series, and was still
shrinking from throwing it after the rest into the swiftly destroying
flame, when the old nurse came in, and asked if she would see “Master
Henry,”—meaning that youngest member of the Westwick family, who had
publicly declared his contempt for his brother in the smoking-room of
the club.

Agnes hesitated. A faint tinge of colour stole over her face.

There had been a long past time when Henry Westwick had owned that he
loved her. She had made her confession to him, acknowledging that her
heart was given to his eldest brother. He had submitted to his
disappointment; and they had met thenceforth as cousins and friends.
Never before had she associated the idea of him with embarrassing
recollections. But now, on the very day when his brother’s marriage to
another woman had consummated his brother’s treason towards her, there
was something vaguely repellent in the prospect of seeing him. The old
nurse (who remembered them both in their cradles) observed her
hesitation; and sympathising of course with the man, put in a timely
word for Henry. “He says, he’s going away, my dear; and he only wants
to shake hands, and say good-bye.” This plain statement of the case had
its effect. Agnes decided on receiving her cousin.

He entered the room so rapidly that he surprised her in the act of
throwing the fragments of Montbarry’s last letter into the fire. She
hurriedly spoke first.

“You are leaving London very suddenly, Henry. Is it business? or
pleasure?”

Instead of answering her, he pointed to the flaming letter, and to some
black ashes of burnt paper lying lightly in the lower part of the
fireplace.

“Are you burning letters?”

“Yes.”

“_His_ letters?”

“Yes.”

He took her hand gently. “I had no idea I was intruding on you, at a
time when you must wish to be alone. Forgive me, Agnes—I shall see you
when I return.”

She signed to him, with a faint smile, to take a chair.

“We have known one another since we were children,” she said. “Why
should I feel a foolish pride about myself in your presence? why should
I have any secrets from you? I sent back all your brother’s gifts to me
some time ago. I have been advised to do more, to keep nothing that can
remind me of him—in short, to burn his letters. I have taken the
advice; but I own I shrank a little from destroying the last of the
letters. No—not because it was the last, but because it had this in
it.” She opened her hand, and showed him a lock of Montbarry’s hair,
tied with a morsel of golden cord. “Well! well! let it go with the
rest.”

She dropped it into the flame. For a while, she stood with her back to
Henry, leaning on the mantel-piece, and looking into the fire. He took
the chair to which she had pointed, with a strange contradiction of
expression in his face: the tears were in his eyes, while the brows
above were knit close in an angry frown. He muttered to himself, “Damn
him!”

She rallied her courage, and looked at him again when she spoke. “Well,
Henry, and why are you going away?”

“I am out of spirits, Agnes, and I want a change.”

She paused before she spoke again. His face told her plainly that he
was thinking of _her_ when he made that reply. She was grateful to him,
but her mind was not with him: her mind was still with the man who had
deserted her. She turned round again to the fire.

“Is it true,” she asked, after a long silence, “that they have been
married to-day?”

He answered ungraciously in the one necessary word:—“Yes.”

“Did you go to the church?”

He resented the question with an expression of indignant surprise. “Go
to the church?” he repeated. “I would as soon go to—” He checked
himself there. “How can you ask?” he added in lower tones. “I have
never spoken to Montbarry, I have not even seen him, since he treated
you like the scoundrel and the fool that he is.”

She looked at him suddenly, without saying a word. He understood her,
and begged her pardon. But he was still angry. “The reckoning comes to
some men,” he said, “even in this world. He will live to rue the day
when he married that woman!”

Agnes took a chair by his side, and looked at him with a gentle
surprise.

“Is it quite reasonable to be so angry with her, because your brother
preferred her to me?” she asked.

Henry turned on her sharply. “Do _you_ defend the Countess, of all the
people in the world?”

“Why not?” Agnes answered. “I know nothing against her. On the only
occasion when we met, she appeared to be a singularly timid, nervous
person, looking dreadfully ill; and _being_ indeed so ill that she
fainted under the heat of my room. Why should we not do her justice? We
know that she was innocent of any intention to wrong me; we know that
she was not aware of my engagement—”

Henry lifted his hand impatiently, and stopped her. “There is such a
thing as being _too_ just and _too_ forgiving!” he interposed. “I can’t
bear to hear you talk in that patient way, after the scandalously cruel
manner in which you have been treated. Try to forget them both, Agnes.
I wish to God I could help you to do it!”

Agnes laid her hand on his arm. “You are very good to me, Henry; but
you don’t quite understand me. I was thinking of myself and my trouble
in quite a different way, when you came in. I was wondering whether
anything which has so entirely filled my heart, and so absorbed all
that is best and truest in me, as my feeling for your brother, can
really pass away as if it had never existed. I have destroyed the last
visible things that remind me of him. In this world I shall see him no
more. But is the tie that once bound us, completely broken? Am I as
entirely parted from the good and evil fortune of his life as if we had
never met and never loved? What do _you_ think, Henry? I can hardly
believe it.”

“If you could bring the retribution on him that he has deserved,” Henry
Westwick answered sternly, “I might be inclined to agree with you.”

As that reply passed his lips, the old nurse appeared again at the
door, announcing another visitor.

“I’m sorry to disturb you, my dear. But here is little Mrs. Ferrari
wanting to know when she may say a few words to you.”

Agnes turned to Henry, before she replied. “You remember Emily Bidwell,
my favourite pupil years ago at the village school, and afterwards my
maid? She left me, to marry an Italian courier, named Ferrari—and I am
afraid it has not turned out very well. Do you mind my having her in
here for a minute or two?”

Henry rose to take his leave. “I should be glad to see Emily again at
any other time,” he said. “But it is best that I should go now. My mind
is disturbed, Agnes; I might say things to you, if I stayed here any
longer, which—which are better not said now. I shall cross the Channel
by the mail to-night, and see how a few weeks’ change will help me.” He
took her hand. “Is there anything in the world that I can do for you?”
he asked very earnestly. She thanked him, and tried to release her
hand. He held it with a tremulous lingering grasp. “God bless you,
Agnes!” he said in faltering tones, with his eyes on the ground. Her
face flushed again, and the next instant turned paler than ever; she
knew his heart as well as he knew it himself—she was too distressed to
speak. He lifted her hand to his lips, kissed it fervently, and,
without looking at her again, left the room. The nurse hobbled after
him to the head of the stairs: she had not forgotten the time when the
younger brother had been the unsuccessful rival of the elder for the
hand of Agnes. “Don’t be down-hearted, Master Henry,” whispered the old
woman, with the unscrupulous common sense of persons in the lower rank
of life. “Try her again, when you come back!”

Left alone for a few moments, Agnes took a turn in the room, trying to
compose herself. She paused before a little water-colour drawing on the
wall, which had belonged to her mother: it was her own portrait when
she was a child. “How much happier we should be,” she thought to
herself sadly, “if we never grew up!”

The courier’s wife was shown in—a little meek melancholy woman, with
white eyelashes, and watery eyes, who curtseyed deferentially and was
troubled with a small chronic cough. Agnes shook hands with her kindly.
“Well, Emily, what can I do for you?”

The courier’s wife made rather a strange answer: “I’m afraid to tell
you, Miss.”

“Is it such a very difficult favour to grant? Sit down, and let me hear
how you are going on. Perhaps the petition will slip out while we are
talking. How does your husband behave to you?”

Emily’s light grey eyes looked more watery than ever. She shook her
head and sighed resignedly. “I have no positive complaint to make
against him, Miss. But I’m afraid he doesn’t care about me; and he
seems to take no interest in his home—I may almost say he’s tired of
his home. It might be better for both of us, Miss, if he went
travelling for a while—not to mention the money, which is beginning to
be wanted sadly.” She put her handkerchief to her eyes, and sighed
again more resignedly than ever.

“I don’t quite understand,” said Agnes. “I thought your husband had an
engagement to take some ladies to Switzerland and Italy?”

“That was his ill-luck, Miss. One of the ladies fell ill—and the others
wouldn’t go without her. They paid him a month’s salary as
compensation. But they had engaged him for the autumn and winter—and
the loss is serious.”

“I am sorry to hear it, Emily. Let us hope he will soon have another
chance.”

“It’s not his turn, Miss, to be recommended when the next applications
come to the couriers’ office. You see, there are so many of them out of
employment just now. If he could be privately recommended—” She
stopped, and left the unfinished sentence to speak for itself.

Agnes understood her directly. “You want my recommendation,” she
rejoined. “Why couldn’t you say so at once?”

Emily blushed. “It would be such a chance for my husband,” she answered
confusedly. “A letter, inquiring for a good courier (a six months’
engagement, Miss!) came to the office this morning. It’s another man’s
turn to be chosen—and the secretary will recommend him. If my husband
could only send his testimonials by the same post—with just a word in
your name, Miss—it might turn the scale, as they say. A private
recommendation between gentlefolks goes so far.” She stopped again, and
sighed again, and looked down at the carpet, as if she had some private
reason for feeling a little ashamed of herself.

Agnes began to be rather weary of the persistent tone of mystery in
which her visitor spoke. “If you want my interest with any friend of
mine,” she said, “why can’t you tell me the name?”

The courier’s wife began to cry. “I’m ashamed to tell you, Miss.”

For the first time, Agnes spoke sharply. “Nonsense, Emily! Tell me the
name directly—or drop the subject—whichever you like best.”

Emily made a last desperate effort. She wrung her handkerchief hard in
her lap, and let off the name as if she had been letting off a loaded
gun:—“Lord Montbarry!”

Agnes rose and looked at her.

“You have disappointed me,” she said very quietly, but with a look
which the courier’s wife had never seen in her face before. “Knowing
what you know, you ought to be aware that it is impossible for me to
communicate with Lord Montbarry. I always supposed you had some
delicacy of feeling. I am sorry to find that I have been mistaken.”

Weak as she was, Emily had spirit enough to feel the reproof. She
walked in her meek noiseless way to the door. “I beg your pardon, Miss.
I am not quite so bad as you think me. But I beg your pardon, all the
same.”

She opened the door. Agnes called her back. There was something in the
woman’s apology that appealed irresistibly to her just and generous
nature. “Come,” she said; “we must not part in this way. Let me not
misunderstand you. What is it that you expected me to do?”

Emily was wise enough to answer this time without any reserve. “My
husband will send his testimonials, Miss, to Lord Montbarry in
Scotland. I only wanted you to let him say in his letter that his wife
has been known to you since she was a child, and that you feel some
little interest in his welfare on that account. I don’t ask it now,
Miss. You have made me understand that I was wrong.”

Had she really been wrong? Past remembrances, as well as present
troubles, pleaded powerfully with Agnes for the courier’s wife. “It
seems only a small favour to ask,” she said, speaking under the impulse
of kindness which was the strongest impulse in her nature. “But I am
not sure that I ought to allow my name to be mentioned in your
husband’s letter. Let me hear again exactly what he wishes to say.”
Emily repeated the words—and then offered one of those suggestions,
which have a special value of their own to persons unaccustomed to the
use of their pens. “Suppose you try, Miss, how it looks in writing?”
Childish as the idea was, Agnes tried the experiment. “If I let you
mention me,” she said, “we must at least decide what you are to say.”
She wrote the words in the briefest and plainest form:—“I venture to
state that my wife has been known from her childhood to Miss Agnes
Lockwood, who feels some little interest in my welfare on that
account.” Reduced to this one sentence, there was surely nothing in the
reference to her name which implied that Agnes had permitted it, or
that she was even aware of it. After a last struggle with herself, she
handed the written paper to Emily. “Your husband must copy it exactly,
without altering anything,” she stipulated. “On that condition, I grant
your request.” Emily was not only thankful—she was really touched.
Agnes hurried the little woman out of the room. “Don’t give me time to
repent and take it back again,” she said. Emily vanished.

“Is the tie that once bound us completely broken? Am I as entirely
parted from the good and evil fortune of his life as if we had never
met and never loved?” Agnes looked at the clock on the mantel-piece.
Not ten minutes since, those serious questions had been on her lips. It
almost shocked her to think of the common-place manner in which they
had already met with their reply. The mail of that night would appeal
once more to Montbarry’s remembrance of her—in the choice of a servant.

Two days later, the post brought a few grateful lines from Emily. Her
husband had got the place. Ferrari was engaged, for six months certain,
as Lord Montbarry’s courier.




THE SECOND PART




CHAPTER V


After only one week of travelling in Scotland, my lord and my lady
returned unexpectedly to London. Introduced to the mountains and lakes
of the Highlands, her ladyship positively declined to improve her
acquaintance with them. When she was asked for her reason, she answered
with a Roman brevity, “I have seen Switzerland.”

For a week more, the newly-married couple remained in London, in the
strictest retirement. On one day in that week the nurse returned in a
state of most uncustomary excitement from an errand on which Agnes had
sent her. Passing the door of a fashionable dentist, she had met Lord
Montbarry himself just leaving the house. The good woman’s report
described him, with malicious pleasure, as looking wretchedly ill. “His
cheeks are getting hollow, my dear, and his beard is turning grey. I
hope the dentist hurt him!”

Knowing how heartily her faithful old servant hated the man who had
deserted her, Agnes made due allowance for a large infusion of
exaggeration in the picture presented to her. The main impression
produced on her mind was an impression of nervous uneasiness. If she
trusted herself in the streets by daylight while Lord Montbarry
remained in London, how could she be sure that his next chance-meeting
might not be a meeting with herself? She waited at home, privately
ashamed of her own undignified conduct, for the next two days. On the
third day the fashionable intelligence of the newspapers announced the
departure of Lord and Lady Montbarry for Paris, on their way to Italy.

Mrs. Ferrari, calling the same evening, informed Agnes that her husband
had left her with all reasonable expression of conjugal kindness; his
temper being improved by the prospect of going abroad. But one other
servant accompanied the travellers—Lady Montbarry’s maid, rather a
silent, unsociable woman, so far as Emily had heard. Her ladyship’s
brother, Baron Rivar, was already on the Continent. It had been
arranged that he was to meet his sister and her husband at Rome.

One by one the dull weeks succeeded each other in the life of Agnes.
She faced her position with admirable courage, seeing her friends,
keeping herself occupied in her leisure hours with reading and drawing,
leaving no means untried of diverting her mind from the melancholy
remembrance of the past. But she had loved too faithfully, she had been
wounded too deeply, to feel in any adequate degree the influence of the
moral remedies which she employed. Persons who met with her in the
ordinary relations of life, deceived by her outward serenity of manner,
agreed that “Miss Lockwood seemed to be getting over her
disappointment.” But an old friend and school companion who happened to
see her during a brief visit to London, was inexpressibly distressed by
the change that she detected in Agnes. This lady was Mrs. Westwick, the
wife of that brother of Lord Montbarry who came next to him in age, and
who was described in the “Peerage” as presumptive heir to the title. He
was then away, looking after his interests in some mining property
which he possessed in America. Mrs. Westwick insisted on taking Agnes
back with her to her home in Ireland. “Come and keep me company while
my husband is away. My three little girls will make you their
playfellow, and the only stranger you will meet is the governess, whom
I answer for your liking beforehand. Pack up your things, and I will
call for you to-morrow on my way to the train.” In those hearty terms
the invitation was given. Agnes thankfully accepted it. For three happy
months she lived under the roof of her friend. The girls hung round her
in tears at her departure; the youngest of them wanted to go back with
Agnes to London. Half in jest, half in earnest, she said to her old
friend at parting, “If your governess leaves you, keep the place open
for me.” Mrs. Westwick laughed. The wiser children took it seriously,
and promised to let Agnes know.

On the very day when Miss Lockwood returned to London, she was recalled
to those associations with the past which she was most anxious to
forget. After the first kissings and greetings were over, the old nurse
(who had been left in charge at the lodgings) had some startling
information to communicate, derived from the courier’s wife.

“Here has been little Mrs. Ferrari, my dear, in a dreadful state of
mind, inquiring when you would be back. Her husband has left Lord
Montbarry, without a word of warning—and nobody knows what has become
of him.”

Agnes looked at her in astonishment. “Are you sure of what you are
saying?” she asked.

The nurse was quite sure. “Why, Lord bless you! the news comes from the
couriers’ office in Golden Square—from the secretary, Miss Agnes, the
secretary himself!” Hearing this, Agnes began to feel alarmed as well
as surprised. It was still early in the evening. She at once sent a
message to Mrs. Ferrari, to say that she had returned.

In an hour more the courier’s wife appeared, in a state of agitation
which it was not easy to control. Her narrative, when she was at last
able to speak connectedly, entirely confirmed the nurse’s report of it.

After hearing from her husband with tolerable regularity from Paris,
Rome, and Venice, Emily had twice written to him afterwards—and had
received no reply. Feeling uneasy, she had gone to the office in Golden
Square, to inquire if he had been heard of there. The post of the
morning had brought a letter to the secretary from a courier then at
Venice. It contained startling news of Ferrari. His wife had been
allowed to take a copy of it, which she now handed to Agnes to read.

The writer stated that he had recently arrived in Venice. He had
previously heard that Ferrari was with Lord and Lady Montbarry, at one
of the old Venetian palaces which they had hired for a term. Being a
friend of Ferrari, he had gone to pay him a visit. Ringing at the door
that opened on the canal, and failing to make anyone hear him, he had
gone round to a side entrance opening on one of the narrow lanes of
Venice. Here, standing at the door (as if she was waiting for him to
try that way next), he found a pale woman with magnificent dark eyes,
who proved to be no other than Lady Montbarry herself.

She asked, in Italian, what he wanted. He answered that he wanted to
see the courier Ferrari, if it was quite convenient. She at once
informed him that Ferrari had left the palace, without assigning any
reason, and without even leaving an address at which his monthly salary
(then due to him) could be paid. Amazed at this reply, the courier
inquired if any person had offended Ferrari, or quarrelled with him.
The lady answered, “To my knowledge, certainly not. I am Lady
Montbarry; and I can positively assure you that Ferrari was treated
with the greatest kindness in this house. We are as much astonished as
you are at his extraordinary disappearance. If you should hear of him,
pray let us know, so that we may at least pay him the money which is
due.”

After one or two more questions (quite readily answered) relating to
the date and the time of day at which Ferrari had left the palace, the
courier took his leave.

He at once entered on the necessary investigations—without the
slightest result so far as Ferrari was concerned. Nobody had seen him.
Nobody appeared to have been taken into his confidence. Nobody knew
anything (that is to say, anything of the slightest importance) even
about persons so distinguished as Lord and Lady Montbarry. It was
reported that her ladyship’s English maid had left her, before the
disappearance of Ferrari, to return to her relatives in her own
country, and that Lady Montbarry had taken no steps to supply her
place. His lordship was described as being in delicate health. He lived
in the strictest retirement—nobody was admitted to him, not even his
own countrymen. A stupid old woman was discovered who did the housework
at the palace, arriving in the morning and going away again at night.
She had never seen the lost courier—she had never even seen Lord
Montbarry, who was then confined to his room. Her ladyship, “a most
gracious and adorable mistress,” was in constant attendance on her
noble husband. There was no other servant then in the house (so far as
the old woman knew) but herself. The meals were sent in from a
restaurant. My lord, it was said, disliked strangers. My lord’s
brother-in-law, the Baron, was generally shut up in a remote part of
the palace, occupied (the gracious mistress said) with experiments in
chemistry. The experiments sometimes made a nasty smell. A doctor had
latterly been called in to his lordship—an Italian doctor, long
resident in Venice. Inquiries being addressed to this gentleman (a
physician of undoubted capacity and respectability), it turned out that
he also had never seen Ferrari, having been summoned to the palace (as
his memorandum book showed) at a date subsequent to the courier’s
disappearance. The doctor described Lord Montbarry’s malady as
bronchitis. So far, there was no reason to feel any anxiety, though the
attack was a sharp one. If alarming symptoms should appear, he had
arranged with her ladyship to call in another physician. For the rest,
it was impossible to speak too highly of my lady; night and day, she
was at her lord’s bedside.

With these particulars began and ended the discoveries made by
Ferrari’s courier-friend. The police were on the look-out for the lost
man—and that was the only hope which could be held forth for the
present, to Ferrari’s wife.

“What do you think of it, Miss?” the poor woman asked eagerly. “What
would you advise me to do?”

Agnes was at a loss how to answer her; it was an effort even to listen
to what Emily was saying. The references in the courier’s letter to
Montbarry—the report of his illness, the melancholy picture of his
secluded life—had reopened the old wound. She was not even thinking of
the lost Ferrari; her mind was at Venice, by the sick man’s bedside.

“I hardly know what to say,” she answered. “I have had no experience in
serious matters of this kind.”

“Do you think it would help you, Miss, if you read my husband’s letters
to me? There are only three of them—they won’t take long to read.”

Agnes compassionately read the letters.

They were not written in a very tender tone. “Dear Emily,” and “Yours
affectionately”—these conventional phrases, were the only phrases of
endearment which they contained. In the first letter, Lord Montbarry
was not very favourably spoken of:—“We leave Paris to-morrow. I don’t
much like my lord. He is proud and cold, and, between ourselves, stingy
in money matters. I have had to dispute such trifles as a few centimes
in the hotel bill; and twice already, some sharp remarks have passed
between the newly-married couple, in consequence of her ladyship’s
freedom in purchasing pretty tempting things at the shops in Paris. ‘I
can’t afford it; you must keep to your allowance.’ She has had to hear
those words already. For my part, I like her. She has the nice, easy
foreign manners—_she_ talks to me as if I was a human being like
herself.”

The second letter was dated from Rome.

“My lord’s caprices” (Ferrari wrote) “have kept us perpetually on the
move. He is becoming incurably restless. I suspect he is uneasy in his
mind. Painful recollections, I should say—I find him constantly reading
old letters, when her ladyship is not present. We were to have stopped
at Genoa, but he hurried us on. The same thing at Florence. Here, at
Rome, my lady insists on resting. Her brother has met us at this place.
There has been a quarrel already (the lady’s maid tells me) between my
lord and the Baron. The latter wanted to borrow money of the former.
His lordship refused in language which offended Baron Rivar. My lady
pacified them, and made them shake hands.”

The third, and last letter, was from Venice.

“More of my lord’s economy! Instead of staying at the hotel, we have
hired a damp, mouldy, rambling old palace. My lady insists on having
the best suites of rooms wherever we go—and the palace comes cheaper
for a two months’ term. My lord tried to get it for longer; he says the
quiet of Venice is good for his nerves. But a foreign speculator has
secured the palace, and is going to turn it into an hotel. The Baron is
still with us, and there have been more disagreements about money
matters. I don’t like the Baron—and I don’t find the attractions of my
lady grow on me. She was much nicer before the Baron joined us. My lord
is a punctual paymaster; it’s a matter of honour with him; he hates
parting with his money, but he does it because he has given his word. I
receive my salary regularly at the end of each month—not a franc extra,
though I have done many things which are not part of a courier’s proper
work. Fancy the Baron trying to borrow money of _me!_ He is an
inveterate gambler. I didn’t believe it when my lady’s maid first told
me so—but I have seen enough since to satisfy me that she was right. I
have seen other things besides, which—well! which don’t increase my
respect for my lady and the Baron. The maid says she means to give
warning to leave. She is a respectable British female, and doesn’t take
things quite so easily as I do. It is a dull life here. No going into
company—no company at home—not a creature sees my lord—not even the
consul, or the banker. When he goes out, he goes alone, and generally
towards nightfall. Indoors, he shuts himself up in his own room with
his books, and sees as little of his wife and the Baron as possible. I
fancy things are coming to a crisis here. If my lord’s suspicions are
once awakened, the consequences will be terrible. Under certain
provocations, the noble Montbarry is a man who would stick at nothing.
However, the pay is good—and I can’t afford to talk of leaving the
place, like my lady’s maid.”

Agnes handed back the letters—so suggestive of the penalty paid already
for his own infatuation by the man who had deserted her!—with feelings
of shame and distress, which made her no fit counsellor for the
helpless woman who depended on her advice.

“The one thing I can suggest,” she said, after first speaking some kind
words of comfort and hope, “is that we should consult a person of
greater experience than ours. Suppose I write and ask my lawyer (who is
also my friend and trustee) to come and advise us to-morrow after his
business hours?”

Emily eagerly and gratefully accepted the suggestion. An hour was
arranged for the meeting on the next day; the correspondence was left
under the care of Agnes; and the courier’s wife took her leave.

Weary and heartsick, Agnes lay down on the sofa, to rest and compose
herself. The careful nurse brought in a reviving cup of tea. Her quaint
gossip about herself and her occupations while Agnes had been away,
acted as a relief to her mistress’s overburdened mind. They were still
talking quietly, when they were startled by a loud knock at the house
door. Hurried footsteps ascended the stairs. The door of the
sitting-room was thrown open violently; the courier’s wife rushed in
like a mad woman. “He’s dead! They’ve murdered him!” Those wild words
were all she could say. She dropped on her knees at the foot of the
sofa—held out her hand with something clasped in it—and fell back in a
swoon.

The nurse, signing to Agnes to open the window, took the necessary
measures to restore the fainting woman. “What’s this?” she exclaimed.
“Here’s a letter in her hand. See what it is, Miss.”

The open envelope was addressed (evidently in a feigned hand-writing)
to “Mrs. Ferrari.” The post-mark was “Venice.” The contents of the
envelope were a sheet of foreign note-paper, and a folded enclosure.

On the note-paper, one line only was written. It was again in a feigned
handwriting, and it contained these words:

“_To console you for the loss of your husband._”

Agnes opened the enclosure next.

It was a Bank of England note for a thousand pounds.




CHAPTER VI


The next day, the friend and legal adviser of Agnes Lockwood, Mr. Troy,
called on her by appointment in the evening.

Mrs. Ferrari—still persisting in the conviction of her husband’s
death—had sufficiently recovered to be present at the consultation.
Assisted by Agnes, she told the lawyer the little that was known
relating to Ferrari’s disappearance, and then produced the
correspondence connected with that event. Mr. Troy read (first) the
three letters addressed by Ferrari to his wife; (secondly) the letter
written by Ferrari’s courier-friend, describing his visit to the palace
and his interview with Lady Montbarry; and (thirdly) the one line of
anonymous writing which had accompanied the extraordinary gift of a
thousand pounds to Ferrari’s wife.

Well known, at a later period, as the lawyer who acted for Lady
Lydiard, in the case of theft, generally described as the case of “My
Lady’s Money,” Mr. Troy was not only a man of learning and experience
in his profession—he was also a man who had seen something of society
at home and abroad. He possessed a keen eye for character, a quaint
humour, and a kindly nature which had not been deteriorated even by a
lawyer’s professional experience of mankind. With all these personal
advantages, it is a question, nevertheless, whether he was the fittest
adviser whom Agnes could have chosen under the circumstances. Little
Mrs. Ferrari, with many domestic merits, was an essentially commonplace
woman. Mr. Troy was the last person living who was likely to attract
her sympathies—he was the exact opposite of a commonplace man.

“She looks very ill, poor thing!” In these words the lawyer opened the
business of the evening, referring to Mrs. Ferrari as unceremoniously
as if she had been out of the room.

“She has suffered a terrible shock,” Agnes answered.

Mr. Troy turned to Mrs. Ferrari, and looked at her again, with the
interest due to the victim of a shock. He drummed absently with his
fingers on the table. At last he spoke to her.

“My good lady, you don’t really believe that your husband is dead?”

Mrs. Ferrari put her handkerchief to her eyes. The word “dead” was
ineffectual to express her feelings. “Murdered!” she said sternly,
behind her handkerchief.

“Why? And by whom?” Mr. Troy asked.

Mrs. Ferrari seemed to have some difficulty in answering. “You have
read my husband’s letters, sir,” she began. “I believe he discovered—”
She got as far as that, and there she stopped.

“What did he discover?”

There are limits to human patience—even the patience of a bereaved
wife. This cool question irritated Mrs. Ferrari into expressing herself
plainly at last.

“He discovered Lady Montbarry and the Baron!” she answered, with a
burst of hysterical vehemence. “The Baron is no more that vile woman’s
brother than I am. The wickedness of those two wretches came to my poor
dear husband’s knowledge. The lady’s maid left her place on account of
it. If Ferrari had gone away too, he would have been alive at this
moment. They have killed him. I say they have killed him, to prevent it
from getting to Lord Montbarry’s ears.” So, in short sharp sentences,
and in louder and louder accents, Mrs. Ferrari stated _her_ opinion of
the case.

Still keeping his own view in reserve, Mr. Troy listened with an
expression of satirical approval.

“Very strongly stated, Mrs. Ferrari,” he said. “You build up your
sentences well; you clinch your conclusions in a workmanlike manner. If
you had been a man, you would have made a good lawyer—you would have
taken juries by the scruff of their necks. Complete the case, my good
lady—complete the case. Tell us next who sent you this letter,
enclosing the bank-note. The ‘two wretches’ who murdered Mr. Ferrari
would hardly put their hands in their pockets and send you a thousand
pounds. Who is it—eh? I see the post-mark on the letter is ‘Venice.’
Have you any friend in that interesting city, with a large heart, and a
purse to correspond, who has been let into the secret and who wishes to
console you anonymously?”

It was not easy to reply to this. Mrs. Ferrari began to feel the first
inward approaches of something like hatred towards Mr. Troy. “I don’t
understand you, sir,” she answered. “I don’t think this is a joking
matter.”

Agnes interfered, for the first time. She drew her chair a little
nearer to her legal counsellor and friend.

“What is the most probable explanation, in your opinion?” she asked.

“I shall offend Mrs. Ferrari if I tell you,” Mr. Troy answered.

“No, sir, you won’t!” cried Mrs. Ferrari, hating Mr. Troy undisguisedly
by this time.

The lawyer leaned back in his chair. “Very well,” he said, in his most
good-humoured manner. “Let’s have it out. Observe, madam, I don’t
dispute your view of the position of affairs at the palace in Venice.
You have your husband’s letters to justify you; and you have also the
significant fact that Lady Montbarry’s maid did really leave the house.
We will say, then, that Lord Montbarry has presumably been made the
victim of a foul wrong—that Mr. Ferrari was the first to find it
out—and that the guilty persons had reason to fear, not only that he
would acquaint Lord Montbarry with his discovery, but that he would be
a principal witness against them if the scandal was made public in a
court of law. Now mark! Admitting all this, I draw a totally different
conclusion from the conclusion at which you have arrived. Here is your
husband left in this miserable household of three, under very awkward
circumstances for _him_. What does he do? But for the bank-note and the
written message sent to you with it, I should say that he had wisely
withdrawn himself from association with a disgraceful discovery and
exposure, by taking secretly to flight. The money modifies this
view—unfavourably so far as Mr. Ferrari is concerned. I still believe
he is keeping out of the way. But I now say he is _paid_ for keeping
out of the way—and that bank-note there on the table is the price of
his absence, sent by the guilty persons to his wife.”

Mrs. Ferrari’s watery grey eyes brightened suddenly; Mrs. Ferrari’s
dull drab-coloured complexion became enlivened by a glow of brilliant
red.

“It’s false!” she cried. “It’s a burning shame to speak of my husband
in that way!”

“I told you I should offend you!” said Mr. Troy.

Agnes interposed once more—in the interests of peace. She took the
offended wife’s hand; she appealed to the lawyer to reconsider that
side of his theory which reflected harshly on Ferrari. While she was
still speaking, the servant interrupted her by entering the room with a
visiting-card. It was the card of Henry Westwick; and there was an
ominous request written on it in pencil. “I bring bad news. Let me see
you for a minute downstairs.” Agnes immediately left the room.

Alone with Mrs. Ferrari, Mr. Troy permitted his natural kindness of
heart to show itself on the surface at last. He tried to make his peace
with the courier’s wife.

“You have every claim, my good soul, to resent a reflection cast upon
your husband,” he began. “I may even say that I respect you for
speaking so warmly in his defence. At the same time, remember, that I
am bound, in such a serious matter as this, to tell you what is really
in my mind. I can have no intention of offending you, seeing that I am
a total stranger to you and to Mr. Ferrari. A thousand pounds is a
large sum of money; and a poor man may excusably be tempted by it to do
nothing worse than to keep out of the way for a while. My only
interest, acting on your behalf, is to get at the truth. If you will
give me time, I see no reason to despair of finding your husband yet.”

Ferrari’s wife listened, without being convinced: her narrow little
mind, filled to its extreme capacity by her unfavourable opinion of Mr.
Troy, had no room left for the process of correcting its first
impression. “I am much obliged to you, sir,” was all she said. Her eyes
were more communicative—her eyes added, in _their_ language, “You may
say what you please; I will never forgive you to my dying day.”

Mr. Troy gave it up. He composedly wheeled his chair around, put his
hands in his pockets, and looked out of window.

After an interval of silence, the drawing-room door was opened.

Mr. Troy wheeled round again briskly to the table, expecting to see
Agnes. To his surprise there appeared, in her place, a perfect stranger
to him—a gentleman, in the prime of life, with a marked expression of
pain and embarrassment on his handsome face. He looked at Mr. Troy, and
bowed gravely.

“I am so unfortunate as to have brought news to Miss Agnes Lockwood
which has greatly distressed her,” he said. “She has retired to her
room. I am requested to make her excuses, and to speak to you in her
place.”

Having introduced himself in those terms, he noticed Mrs. Ferrari, and
held out his hand to her kindly. “It is some years since we last met,
Emily,” he said. “I am afraid you have almost forgotten the ‘Master
Henry’ of old times.” Emily, in some little confusion, made her
acknowledgments, and begged to know if she could be of any use to Miss
Lockwood. “The old nurse is with her,” Henry answered; “they will be
better left together.” He turned once more to Mr. Troy. “I ought to
tell you,” he said, “that my name is Henry Westwick. I am the younger
brother of the late Lord Montbarry.”

“The _late_ Lord Montbarry!” Mr. Troy exclaimed.

“My brother died at Venice yesterday evening. There is the telegram.”
With that startling answer, he handed the paper to Mr. Troy.

The message was in these words:

“Lady Montbarry, Venice. To Stephen Robert Westwick, Newbury’s Hotel,
London. It is useless to take the journey. Lord Montbarry died of
bronchitis, at 8.40 this evening. All needful details by post.”

“Was this expected, sir?” the lawyer asked.

“I cannot say that it has taken us entirely by surprise,” Henry
answered. “My brother Stephen (who is now the head of the family)
received a telegram three days since, informing him that alarming
symptoms had declared themselves, and that a second physician had been
called in. He telegraphed back to say that he had left Ireland for
London, on his way to Venice, and to direct that any further message
might be sent to his hotel. The reply came in a second telegram. It
announced that Lord Montbarry was in a state of insensibility, and
that, in his brief intervals of consciousness, he recognised nobody. My
brother was advised to wait in London for later information. The third
telegram is now in your hands. That is all I know, up to the present
time.”

Happening to look at the courier’s wife, Mr. Troy was struck by the
expression of blank fear which showed itself in the woman’s face.

“Mrs. Ferrari,” he said, “have you heard what Mr. Westwick has just
told me?”

“Every word of it, sir.”

“Have you any questions to ask?”

“No, sir.”

“You seem to be alarmed,” the lawyer persisted. “Is it still about your
husband?”

“I shall never see my husband again, sir. I have thought so all along,
as you know. I feel sure of it now.”

“Sure of it, after what you have just heard?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Can you tell me why?”

“No, sir. It’s a feeling I have. I can’t tell why.”

“Oh, a feeling?” Mr. Troy repeated, in a tone of compassionate
contempt. “When it comes to feelings, my good soul—!” He left the
sentence unfinished, and rose to take his leave of Mr. Westwick. The
truth is, he began to feel puzzled himself, and he did not choose to
let Mrs. Ferrari see it. “Accept the expression of my sympathy, sir,”
he said to Mr. Westwick politely. “I wish you good evening.”

Henry turned to Mrs. Ferrari as the lawyer closed the door. “I have
heard of your trouble, Emily, from Miss Lockwood. Is there anything I
can do to help you?”

“Nothing, sir, thank you. Perhaps, I had better go home after what has
happened? I will call to-morrow, and see if I can be of any use to Miss
Agnes. I am very sorry for her.” She stole away, with her formal
curtsey, her noiseless step, and her obstinate resolution to take the
gloomiest view of her husband’s case.

Henry Westwick looked round him in the solitude of the little
drawing-room. There was nothing to keep him in the house, and yet he
lingered in it. It was something to be even near Agnes—to see the
things belonging to her that were scattered about the room. There, in
the corner, was her chair, with her embroidery on the work-table by its
side. On the little easel near the window was her last drawing, not
quite finished yet. The book she had been reading lay on the sofa, with
her tiny pencil-case in it to mark the place at which she had left off.
One after another, he looked at the objects that reminded him of the
woman whom he loved—took them up tenderly—and laid them down again with
a sigh. Ah, how far, how unattainably far from him, she was still! “She
will never forget Montbarry,” he thought to himself as he took up his
hat to go. “Not one of us feels his death as she feels it. Miserable,
miserable wretch—how she loved him!”

In the street, as Henry closed the house-door, he was stopped by a
passing acquaintance—a wearisome inquisitive man—doubly unwelcome to
him, at that moment. “Sad news, Westwick, this about your brother.
Rather an unexpected death, wasn’t it? We never heard at the club that
Montbarry’s lungs were weak. What will the insurance offices do?”

Henry started; he had never thought of his brother’s life insurance.
What could the offices do but pay? A death by bronchitis, certified by
two physicians, was surely the least disputable of all deaths. “I wish
you hadn’t put that question into my head!” he broke out irritably.
“Ah!” said his friend, “you think the widow will get the money? So do
I! so do I!”




CHAPTER VII


Some days later, the insurance offices (two in number) received the
formal announcement of Lord Montbarry’s death, from her ladyship’s
London solicitors. The sum insured in each office was five thousand
pounds—on which one year’s premium only had been paid. In the face of
such a pecuniary emergency as this, the Directors thought it desirable
to consider their position. The medical advisers of the two offices,
who had recommended the insurance of Lord Montbarry’s life, were called
into council over their own reports. The result excited some interest
among persons connected with the business of life insurance. Without
absolutely declining to pay the money, the two offices (acting in
concert) decided on sending a commission of inquiry to Venice, “for the
purpose of obtaining further information.”

Mr. Troy received the earliest intelligence of what was going on. He
wrote at once to communicate his news to Agnes; adding, what he
considered to be a valuable hint, in these words:

“You are intimately acquainted, I know, with Lady Barville, the late
Lord Montbarry’s eldest sister. The solicitors employed by her husband
are also the solicitors to one of the two insurance offices. There may
possibly be something in the report of the commission of inquiry
touching on Ferrari’s disappearance. Ordinary persons would not be
permitted, of course, to see such a document. But a sister of the late
lord is so near a relative as to be an exception to general rules. If
Sir Theodore Barville puts it on that footing, the lawyers, even if
they do not allow his wife to look at the report, will at least answer
any discreet questions she may ask referring to it. Let me hear what
you think of this suggestion, at your earliest convenience.”

The reply was received by return of post. Agnes declined to avail
herself of Mr. Troy’s proposal.

“My interference, innocent as it was,” she wrote, “has already been
productive of such deplorable results, that I cannot and dare not stir
any further in the case of Ferrari. If I had not consented to let that
unfortunate man refer to me by name, the late Lord Montbarry would
never have engaged him, and his wife would have been spared the misery
and suspense from which she is suffering now. I would not even look at
the report to which you allude if it was placed in my hands—I have
heard more than enough already of that hideous life in the palace at
Venice. If Mrs. Ferrari chooses to address herself to Lady Barville
(with your assistance), that is of course quite another thing. But,
even in this case, I must make it a positive condition that my name
shall not be mentioned. Forgive me, dear Mr. Troy! I am very unhappy,
and very unreasonable—but I am only a woman, and you must not expect
too much from me.”

Foiled in this direction, the lawyer next advised making the attempt to
discover the present address of Lady Montbarry’s English maid. This
excellent suggestion had one drawback: it could only be carried out by
spending money—and there was no money to spend. Mrs. Ferrari shrank
from the bare idea of making any use of the thousand-pound note. It had
been deposited in the safe keeping of a bank. If it was even mentioned
in her hearing, she shuddered and referred to it, with melodramatic
fervour, as “my husband’s blood-money!”

So, under stress of circumstances, the attempt to solve the mystery of
Ferrari’s disappearance was suspended for a while.

It was the last month of the year 1860. The commission of inquiry was
already at work; having begun its investigations on December 6. On the
10th, the term for which the late Lord Montbarry had hired the Venetian
palace, expired. News by telegram reached the insurance offices that
Lady Montbarry had been advised by her lawyers to leave for London with
as little delay as possible. Baron Rivar, it was believed, would
accompany her to England, but would not remain in that country, unless
his services were absolutely required by her ladyship. The Baron, “well
known as an enthusiastic student of chemistry,” had heard of certain
recent discoveries in connection with that science in the United
States, and was anxious to investigate them personally.

These items of news, collected by Mr. Troy, were duly communicated to
Mrs. Ferrari, whose anxiety about her husband made her a frequent, a
too frequent, visitor at the lawyer’s office. She attempted to relate
what she had heard to her good friend and protectress. Agnes steadily
refused to listen, and positively forbade any further conversation
relating to Lord Montbarry’s wife, now that Lord Montbarry was no more.
“You have Mr. Troy to advise you,” she said; “and you are welcome to
what little money I can spare, if money is wanted. All I ask in return
is that you will not distress me. I am trying to separate myself from
remembrances—” her voice faltered; she paused to control herself—“from
remembrances,” she resumed, “which are sadder than ever since I have
heard of Lord Montbarry’s death. Help me by your silence to recover my
spirits, if I can. Let me hear nothing more, until I can rejoice with
you that your husband is found.”

Time advanced to the 13th of the month; and more information of the
interesting sort reached Mr. Troy. The labours of the insurance
commission had come to an end—the report had been received from Venice
on that day.




CHAPTER VIII


On the 14th the Directors and their legal advisers met for the reading
of the report, with closed doors. These were the terms in which the
Commissioners related the results of their inquiry:

“_Private and confidential_.


“We have the honour to inform our Directors that we arrived in Venice
on December 6, 1860. On the same day we proceeded to the palace
inhabited by Lord Montbarry at the time of his last illness and death.

“We were received with all possible courtesy by Lady Montbarry’s
brother, Baron Rivar. ‘My sister was her husband’s only attendant
throughout his illness,’ the Baron informed us. ‘She is overwhelmed by
grief and fatigue—or she would have been here to receive you
personally. What are your wishes, gentlemen? and what can I do for you
in her ladyship’s place?’

“In accordance with our instructions, we answered that the death and
burial of Lord Montbarry abroad made it desirable to obtain more
complete information relating to his illness, and to the circumstances
which had attended it, than could be conveyed in writing. We explained
that the law provided for the lapse of a certain interval of time
before the payment of the sum assured, and we expressed our wish to
conduct the inquiry with the most respectful consideration for her
ladyship’s feelings, and for the convenience of any other members of
the family inhabiting the house.

“To this the Baron replied, ‘I am the only member of the family living
here, and I and the palace are entirely at your disposal.’ From first
to last we found this gentleman perfectly straightforward, and most
amiably willing to assist us.

“With the one exception of her ladyship’s room, we went over the whole
of the palace the same day. It is an immense place only partially
furnished. The first floor and part of the second floor were the
portions of it that had been inhabited by Lord Montbarry and the
members of the household. We saw the bedchamber, at one extremity of
the palace, in which his lordship died, and the small room
communicating with it, which he used as a study. Next to this was a
large apartment or hall, the doors of which he habitually kept locked,
his object being (as we were informed) to pursue his studies
uninterruptedly in perfect solitude. On the other side of the large
hall were the bedchamber occupied by her ladyship, and the
dressing-room in which the maid slept previous to her departure for
England. Beyond these were the dining and reception rooms, opening into
an antechamber, which gave access to the grand staircase of the palace.

“The only inhabited rooms on the second floor were the sitting-room and
bedroom occupied by Baron Rivar, and another room at some distance from
it, which had been the bedroom of the courier Ferrari.

“The rooms on the third floor and on the basement were completely
unfurnished, and in a condition of great neglect. We inquired if there
was anything to be seen below the basement—and we were at once informed
that there were vaults beneath, which we were at perfect liberty to
visit.

“We went down, so as to leave no part of the palace unexplored. The
vaults were, it was believed, used as dungeons in the old times—say,
some centuries since. Air and light were only partially admitted to
these dismal places by two long shafts of winding construction, which
communicated with the back yard of the palace, and the openings of
which, high above the ground, were protected by iron gratings. The
stone stairs leading down into the vaults could be closed at will by a
heavy trap-door in the back hall, which we found open. The Baron
himself led the way down the stairs. We remarked that it might be
awkward if that trap-door fell down and closed the opening behind us.
The Baron smiled at the idea. ‘Don’t be alarmed, gentlemen,’ he said;
‘the door is safe. I had an interest in seeing to it myself, when we
first inhabited the palace. My favourite study is the study of
experimental chemistry—and my workshop, since we have been in Venice,
is down here.’

“These last words explained a curious smell in the vaults, which we
noticed the moment we entered them. We can only describe the smell by
saying that it was of a twofold sort—faintly aromatic, as it were, in
its first effect, but with some after-odour very sickening in our
nostrils. The Baron’s furnaces and retorts, and other things, were all
there to speak for themselves, together with some packages of
chemicals, having the name and address of the person who had supplied
them plainly visible on their labels. ‘Not a pleasant place for study,’
Baron Rivar observed, ‘but my sister is timid. She has a horror of
chemical smells and explosions—and she has banished me to these lower
regions, so that my experiments may neither be smelt nor heard.’ He
held out his hands, on which we had noticed that he wore gloves in the
house. ‘Accidents will happen sometimes,’ he said, ‘no matter how
careful a man may be. I burnt my hands severely in trying a new
combination the other day, and they are only recovering now.’

“We mention these otherwise unimportant incidents, in order to show
that our exploration of the palace was not impeded by any attempt at
concealment. We were even admitted to her ladyship’s own room—on a
subsequent occasion, when she went out to take the air. Our
instructions recommended us to examine his lordship’s residence,
because the extreme privacy of his life at Venice, and the remarkable
departure of the only two servants in the house, might have some
suspicious connection with the nature of his death. We found nothing to
justify suspicion.

“As to his lordship’s retired way of life, we have conversed on the
subject with the consul and the banker—the only two strangers who held
any communication with him. He called once at the bank to obtain money
on his letter of credit, and excused himself from accepting an
invitation to visit the banker at his private residence, on the ground
of delicate health. His lordship wrote to the same effect on sending
his card to the consul, to excuse himself from personally returning
that gentleman’s visit to the palace. We have seen the letter, and we
beg to offer the following copy of it. ‘Many years passed in India have
injured my constitution. I have ceased to go into society; the one
occupation of my life now is the study of Oriental literature. The air
of Italy is better for me than the air of England, or I should never
have left home. Pray accept the apologies of a student and an invalid.
The active part of my life is at an end.’ The self-seclusion of his
lordship seems to us to be explained in these brief lines. We have not,
however, on that account spared our inquiries in other directions.
Nothing to excite a suspicion of anything wrong has come to our
knowledge.

“As to the departure of the lady’s maid, we have seen the woman’s
receipt for her wages, in which it is expressly stated that she left
Lady Montbarry’s service because she disliked the Continent, and wished
to get back to her own country. This is not an uncommon result of
taking English servants to foreign parts. Lady Montbarry has informed
us that she abstained from engaging another maid in consequence of the
extreme dislike which his lordship expressed to having strangers in the
house, in the state of his health at that time.

“The disappearance of the courier Ferrari is, in itself, unquestionably
a suspicious circumstance. Neither her ladyship nor the Baron can
explain it; and no investigation that we could make has thrown the
smallest light on this event, or has justified us in associating it,
directly or indirectly, with the object of our inquiry. We have even
gone the length of examining the portmanteau which Ferrari left behind
him. It contains nothing but clothes and linen—no money, and not even a
scrap of paper in the pockets of the clothes. The portmanteau remains
in charge of the police.

“We have also found opportunities of speaking privately to the old
woman who attends to the rooms occupied by her ladyship and the Baron.
She was recommended to fill this situation by the keeper of the
restaurant who has supplied the meals to the family throughout the
period of their residence at the palace. Her character is most
favourably spoken of. Unfortunately, her limited intelligence makes her
of no value as a witness. We were patient and careful in questioning
her, and we found her perfectly willing to answer us; but we could
elicit nothing which is worth including in the present report.

“On the second day of our inquiries, we had the honour of an interview
with Lady Montbarry. Her ladyship looked miserably worn and ill, and
seemed to be quite at a loss to understand what we wanted with her.
Baron Rivar, who introduced us, explained the nature of our errand in
Venice, and took pains to assure her that it was a purely formal duty
on which we were engaged. Having satisfied her ladyship on this point,
he discreetly left the room.

“The questions which we addressed to Lady Montbarry related mainly, of
course, to his lordship’s illness. The answers, given with great
nervousness of manner, but without the slightest appearance of reserve,
informed us of the facts that follow:

“Lord Montbarry had been out of order for some time past—nervous and
irritable. He first complained of having taken cold on November 13
last; he passed a wakeful and feverish night, and remained in bed the
next day. Her ladyship proposed sending for medical advice. He refused
to allow her to do this, saying that he could quite easily be his own
doctor in such a trifling matter as a cold. Some hot lemonade was made
at his request, with a view to producing perspiration. Lady Montbarry’s
maid having left her at that time, the courier Ferrari (then the only
servant in the house) went out to buy the lemons. Her ladyship made the
drink with her own hands. It was successful in producing
perspiration—and Lord Montbarry had some hours of sleep afterwards.
Later in the day, having need of Ferrari’s services, Lady Montbarry
rang for him. The bell was not answered. Baron Rivar searched for the
man, in the palace and out of it, in vain. From that time forth not a
trace of Ferrari could be discovered. This happened on November 14.

“On the night of the 14th, the feverish symptoms accompanying his
lordship’s cold returned. They were in part perhaps attributable to the
annoyance and alarm caused by Ferrari’s mysterious disappearance. It
had been impossible to conceal the circumstance, as his lordship rang
repeatedly for the courier; insisting that the man should relieve Lady
Montbarry and the Baron by taking their places during the night at his
bedside.

“On the 15th (the day on which the old woman first came to do the
housework), his lordship complained of sore throat, and of a feeling of
oppression on the chest. On this day, and again on the 16th, her
ladyship and the Baron entreated him to see a doctor. He still refused.
‘I don’t want strange faces about me; my cold will run its course, in
spite of the doctor,’—that was his answer. On the 17th he was so much
worse that it was decided to send for medical help whether he liked it
or not. Baron Rivar, after inquiry at the consul’s, secured the
services of Doctor Bruno, well known as an eminent physician in Venice;
with the additional recommendation of having resided in England, and
having made himself acquainted with English forms of medical practice.

“Thus far our account of his lordship’s illness has been derived from
statements made by Lady Montbarry. The narrative will now be most fitly
continued in the language of the doctor’s own report, herewith
subjoined.

“‘My medical diary informs me that I first saw the English Lord
Montbarry, on November 17. He was suffering from a sharp attack of
bronchitis. Some precious time had been lost, through his obstinate
objection to the presence of a medical man at his bedside. Generally
speaking, he appeared to be in a delicate state of health. His nervous
system was out of order—he was at once timid and contradictory. When I
spoke to him in English, he answered in Italian; and when I tried him
in Italian, he went back to English. It mattered little—the malady had
already made such progress that he could only speak a few words at a
time, and those in a whisper.

“‘I at once applied the necessary remedies. Copies of my prescriptions
(with translation into English) accompany the present statement, and
are left to speak for themselves.

“‘For the next three days I was in constant attendance on my patient.
He answered to the remedies employed—improving slowly, but decidedly. I
could conscientiously assure Lady Montbarry that no danger was to be
apprehended thus far. She was indeed a most devoted wife. I vainly
endeavoured to induce her to accept the services of a competent nurse;
she would allow nobody to attend on her husband but herself. Night and
day this estimable woman was at his bedside. In her brief intervals of
repose, her brother watched the sick man in her place. This brother
was, I must say, very good company, in the intervals when we had time
for a little talk. He dabbled in chemistry, down in the horrid
under-water vaults of the palace; and he wanted to show me some of his
experiments. I have enough of chemistry in writing prescriptions—and I
declined. He took it quite good-humouredly.

“‘I am straying away from my subject. Let me return to the sick lord.

“‘Up to the 20th, then, things went well enough. I was quite unprepared
for the disastrous change that showed itself, when I paid Lord
Montbarry my morning visit on the 21st. He had relapsed, and seriously
relapsed. Examining him to discover the cause, I found symptoms of
pneumonia—that is to say, in unmedical language, inflammation of the
substance of the lungs. He breathed with difficulty, and was only
partially able to relieve himself by coughing. I made the strictest
inquiries, and was assured that his medicine had been administered as
carefully as usual, and that he had not been exposed to any changes of
temperature. It was with great reluctance that I added to Lady
Montbarry’s distress; but I felt bound, when she suggested a
consultation with another physician, to own that I too thought there
was really need for it.

“‘Her ladyship instructed me to spare no expense, and to get the best
medical opinion in Italy. The best opinion was happily within our
reach. The first and foremost of Italian physicians is Torello of
Padua. I sent a special messenger for the great man. He arrived on the
evening of the 21st, and confirmed my opinion that pneumonia had set
in, and that our patient’s life was in danger. I told him what my
treatment of the case had been, and he approved of it in every
particular. He made some valuable suggestions, and (at Lady Montbarry’s
express request) he consented to defer his return to Padua until the
following morning.

“‘We both saw the patient at intervals in the course of the night. The
disease, steadily advancing, set our utmost resistance at defiance. In
the morning Doctor Torello took his leave. “I can be of no further
use,” he said to me. “The man is past all help—and he ought to know
it.”

“‘Later in the day I warned my lord, as gently as I could, that his
time had come. I am informed that there are serious reasons for my
stating what passed between us on this occasion, in detail, and without
any reserve. I comply with the request.

“‘Lord Montbarry received the intelligence of his approaching death
with becoming composure, but with a certain doubt. He signed to me to
put my ear to his mouth. He whispered faintly, “Are you sure?” It was
no time to deceive him; I said, “Positively sure.” He waited a little,
gasping for breath, and then he whispered again, “Feel under my
pillow.” I found under his pillow a letter, sealed and stamped, ready
for the post. His next words were just audible and no more—“Post it
yourself.” I answered, of course, that I would do so—and I did post the
letter with my own hand. I looked at the address. It was directed to a
lady in London. The street I cannot remember. The name I can perfectly
recall: it was an Italian name—“Mrs. Ferrari.”

“‘That night my lord nearly died of asphyxia. I got him through it for
the time; and his eyes showed that he understood me when I told him,
the next morning, that I had posted the letter. This was his last
effort of consciousness. When I saw him again he was sunk in apathy. He
lingered in a state of insensibility, supported by stimulants, until
the 25th, and died (unconscious to the last) on the evening of that
day.

“‘As to the cause of his death, it seems (if I may be excused for
saying so) simply absurd to ask the question. Bronchitis, terminating
in pneumonia—there is no more doubt that this, and this only, was the
malady of which he expired, than that two and two make four. Doctor
Torello’s own note of the case is added here to a duplicate of my
certificate, in order (as I am informed) to satisfy some English
offices in which his lordship’s life was insured. The English offices
must have been founded by that celebrated saint and doubter, mentioned
in the New Testament, whose name was Thomas!’

“Doctor Bruno’s evidence ends here.

“Reverting for a moment to our inquiries addressed to Lady Montbarry,
we have to report that she can give us no information on the subject of
the letter which the doctor posted at Lord Montbarry’s request. When
his lordship wrote it? what it contained? why he kept it a secret from
Lady Montbarry (and from the Baron also); and why he should write at
all to the wife of his courier? these are questions to which we find it
simply impossible to obtain any replies. It seems even useless to say
that the matter is open to suspicion. Suspicion implies conjecture of
some kind—and the letter under my lord’s pillow baffles all conjecture.
Application to Mrs. Ferrari may perhaps clear up the mystery. Her
residence in London will be easily discovered at the Italian Couriers’
Office, Golden Square.

“Having arrived at the close of the present report, we have now to draw
your attention to the conclusion which is justified by the results of
our investigation.

“The plain question before our Directors and ourselves appears to be
this: Has the inquiry revealed any extraordinary circumstances which
render the death of Lord Montbarry open to suspicion? The inquiry has
revealed extraordinary circumstances beyond all doubt—such as the
disappearance of Ferrari, the remarkable absence of the customary
establishment of servants in the house, and the mysterious letter which
his lordship asked the doctor to post. But where is the proof that any
one of these circumstances is associated—suspiciously and directly
associated—with the only event which concerns us, the event of Lord
Montbarry’s death? In the absence of any such proof, and in the face of
the evidence of two eminent physicians, it is impossible to dispute the
statement on the certificate that his lordship died a natural death. We
are bound, therefore, to report, that there are no valid grounds for
refusing the payment of the sum for which the late Lord Montbarry’s
life was assured.

“We shall send these lines to you by the post of to-morrow, December
10; leaving time to receive your further instructions (if any), in
reply to our telegram of this evening announcing the conclusion of the
inquiry.”




CHAPTER IX


“Now, my good creature, whatever you have to say to me, out with it at
once! I don’t want to hurry you needlessly; but these are business
hours, and I have other people’s affairs to attend to besides yours.”

Addressing Ferrari’s wife, with his usual blunt good-humour, in these
terms, Mr. Troy registered the lapse of time by a glance at the watch
on his desk, and then waited to hear what his client had to say to him.

“It’s something more, sir, about the letter with the thousand-pound
note,” Mrs. Ferrari began. “I have found out who sent it to me.”

Mr. Troy started. “This is news indeed!” he said. “Who sent you the
letter?”

“Lord Montbarry sent it, sir.”

It was not easy to take Mr. Troy by surprise. But Mrs. Ferrari threw
him completely off his balance. For a while he could only look at her
in silent surprise. “Nonsense!” he said, as soon as he had recovered
himself. “There is some mistake—it can’t be!”

“There is no mistake,” Mrs. Ferrari rejoined, in her most positive
manner. “Two gentlemen from the insurance offices called on me this
morning, to see the letter. They were completely puzzled—especially
when they heard of the bank-note inside. But they know who sent the
letter. His lordship’s doctor in Venice posted it at his lordship’s
request. Go to the gentlemen yourself, sir, if you don’t believe me.
They were polite enough to ask if I could account for Lord Montbarry’s
writing to me and sending me the money. I gave them my opinion
directly—I said it was like his lordship’s kindness.”

“Like his lordship’s kindness?” Mr. Troy repeated, in blank amazement.

“Yes, sir! Lord Montbarry knew me, like all the other members of his
family, when I was at school on the estate in Ireland. If he could have
done it, he would have protected my poor dear husband. But he was
helpless himself in the hands of my lady and the Baron—and the only
kind thing he could do was to provide for me in my widowhood, like the
true nobleman he was!”

“A very pretty explanation!” said Mr. Troy. “What did your visitors
from the insurance offices think of it?”

“They asked if I had any proof of my husband’s death.”

“And what did you say?”

“I said, ‘I give you better than proof, gentlemen; I give you my
positive opinion.’”

“That satisfied them, of course?”

“They didn’t say so in words, sir. They looked at each other—and wished
me good-morning.”

“Well, Mrs. Ferrari, unless you have some more extraordinary news for
me, I think I shall wish you good-morning too. I can take a note of
your information (very startling information, I own); and, in the
absence of proof, I can do no more.”

“I can provide you with proof, sir—if that is all you want,” said Mrs.
Ferrari, with great dignity. “I only wish to know, first, whether the
law justifies me in doing it. You may have seen in the fashionable
intelligence of the newspapers, that Lady Montbarry has arrived in
London, at Newbury’s Hotel. I propose to go and see her.”

“The deuce you do! May I ask for what purpose?”

Mrs. Ferrari answered in a mysterious whisper. “For the purpose of
catching her in a trap! I shan’t send in my name—I shall announce
myself as a person on business, and the first words I say to her will
be these: ‘I come, my lady, to acknowledge the receipt of the money
sent to Ferrari’s widow.’ Ah! you may well start, Mr. Troy! It almost
takes _you_ off your guard, doesn’t it? Make your mind easy, sir; I
shall find the proof that everybody asks me for in her guilty face. Let
her only change colour by the shadow of a shade—let her eyes only drop
for half an instant—I shall discover her! The one thing I want to know
is, does the law permit it?”

“The law permits it,” Mr. Troy answered gravely; “but whether her
ladyship will permit it, is quite another question. Have you really
courage enough, Mrs. Ferrari, to carry out this notable scheme of
yours? You have been described to me, by Miss Lockwood, as rather a
nervous, timid sort of person—and, if I may trust my own observation, I
should say you justify the description.”

“If you had lived in the country, sir, instead of living in London,”
Mrs. Ferrari replied, “you would sometimes have seen even a sheep turn
on a dog. I am far from saying that I am a bold woman—quite the
reverse. But when I stand in that wretch’s presence, and think of my
murdered husband, the one of us two who is likely to be frightened is
not _me_. I am going there now, sir. You shall hear how it ends. I wish
you good-morning.”

With those brave words the courier’s wife gathered her mantle about
her, and walked out of the room.

Mr. Troy smiled—not satirically, but compassionately. “The little
simpleton!” he thought to himself. “If half of what they say of Lady
Montbarry is true, Mrs. Ferrari and her trap have but a poor prospect
before them. I wonder how it will end?”

All Mr. Troy’s experience failed to forewarn him of how it _did_ end.




CHAPTER X


In the mean time, Mrs. Ferrari held to her resolution. She went
straight from Mr. Troy’s office to Newbury’s Hotel.

Lady Montbarry was at home, and alone. But the authorities of the hotel
hesitated to disturb her when they found that the visitor declined to
mention her name. Her ladyship’s new maid happened to cross the hall
while the matter was still in debate. She was a Frenchwoman, and, on
being appealed to, she settled the question in the swift, easy,
rational French way. “Madame’s appearance was perfectly respectable.
Madame might have reasons for not mentioning her name which Miladi
might approve. In any case, there being no orders forbidding the
introduction of a strange lady, the matter clearly rested between
Madame and Miladi. Would Madame, therefore, be good enough to follow
Miladi’s maid up the stairs?”

In spite of her resolution, Mrs. Ferrari’s heart beat as if it would
burst out of her bosom, when her conductress led her into an ante-room,
and knocked at a door opening into a room beyond. But it is remarkable
that persons of sensitively-nervous organisation are the very persons
who are capable of forcing themselves (apparently by the exercise of a
spasmodic effort of will) into the performance of acts of the most
audacious courage. A low, grave voice from the inner room said, “Come
in.” The maid, opening the door, announced, “A person to see you,
Miladi, on business,” and immediately retired. In the one instant while
these events passed, timid little Mrs. Ferrari mastered her own
throbbing heart; stepped over the threshold, conscious of her clammy
hands, dry lips, and burning head; and stood in the presence of Lord
Montbarry’s widow, to all outward appearance as supremely
self-possessed as her ladyship herself.

It was still early in the afternoon, but the light in the room was dim.
The blinds were drawn down. Lady Montbarry sat with her back to the
windows, as if even the subdued daylight were disagreeable to her. She
had altered sadly for the worse in her personal appearance, since the
memorable day when Doctor Wybrow had seen her in his consulting-room.
Her beauty was gone—her face had fallen away to mere skin and bone; the
contrast between her ghastly complexion and her steely glittering black
eyes was more startling than ever. Robed in dismal black, relieved only
by the brilliant whiteness of her widow’s cap—reclining in a
panther-like suppleness of attitude on a little green sofa—she looked
at the stranger who had intruded on her, with a moment’s languid
curiosity, then dropped her eyes again to the hand-screen which she
held between her face and the fire. “I don’t know you,” she said. “What
do you want with me?”

Mrs. Ferrari tried to answer. Her first burst of courage had already
worn itself out. The bold words that she had determined to speak were
living words still in her mind, but they died on her lips.

There was a moment of silence. Lady Montbarry looked round again at the
speechless stranger. “Are you deaf?” she asked. There was another
pause. Lady Montbarry quietly looked back again at the screen, and put
another question. “Do you want money?”

“Money!” That one word roused the sinking spirit of the courier’s wife.
She recovered her courage; she found her voice. “Look at me, my lady,
if you please,” she said, with a sudden outbreak of audacity.

Lady Montbarry looked round for the third time. The fatal words passed
Mrs. Ferrari’s lips.

“I come, my lady, to acknowledge the receipt of the money sent to
Ferrari’s widow.”

Lady Montbarry’s glittering black eyes rested with steady attention on
the woman who had addressed her in those terms. Not the faintest
expression of confusion or alarm, not even a momentary flutter of
interest stirred the deadly stillness of her face. She reposed as
quietly, she held the screen as composedly, as ever. The test had been
tried, and had utterly failed.

There was another silence. Lady Montbarry considered with herself. The
smile that came slowly and went away suddenly—the smile at once so sad
and so cruel—showed itself on her thin lips. She lifted her screen, and
pointed with it to a seat at the farther end of the room. “Be so good
as to take that chair,” she said.

Helpless under her first bewildering sense of failure—not knowing what
to say or what to do next—Mrs. Ferrari mechanically obeyed. Lady
Montbarry, rising on the sofa for the first time, watched her with
undisguised scrutiny as she crossed the room—then sank back into a
reclining position once more. “No,” she said to herself, “the woman
walks steadily; she is not intoxicated—the only other possibility is
that she may be mad.”

She had spoken loud enough to be heard. Stung by the insult, Mrs.
Ferrari instantly answered her: “I am no more drunk or mad than you
are!”

“No?” said Lady Montbarry. “Then you are only insolent? The ignorant
English mind (I have observed) is apt to be insolent in the exercise of
unrestrained English liberty. This is very noticeable to us foreigners
among you people in the streets. Of course I can’t be insolent to you,
in return. I hardly know what to say to you. My maid was imprudent in
admitting you so easily to my room. I suppose your respectable
appearance misled her. I wonder who you are? You mentioned the name of
a courier who left us very strangely. Was he married by any chance? Are
you his wife? And do you know where he is?”

Mrs. Ferrari’s indignation burst its way through all restraints. She
advanced to the sofa; she feared nothing, in the fervour and rage of
her reply.

“I am his widow—and you know it, you wicked woman! Ah! it was an evil
hour when Miss Lockwood recommended my husband to be his lordship’s
courier—!”

Before she could add another word, Lady Montbarry sprang from the sofa
with the stealthy suddenness of a cat—seized her by both shoulders—and
shook her with the strength and frenzy of a madwoman. “You lie! you
lie! you lie!” She dropped her hold at the third repetition of the
accusation, and threw up her hands wildly with a gesture of despair.
“Oh, Jesu Maria! is it possible?” she cried. “_Can_ the courier have
come to me through that woman?” She turned like lightning on Mrs.
Ferrari, and stopped her as she was escaping from the room. “Stay here,
you fool—stay here, and answer me! If you cry out, as sure as the
heavens are above you, I’ll strangle you with my own hands. Sit down
again—and fear nothing. Wretch! It is I who am frightened—frightened
out of my senses. Confess that you lied, when you used Miss Lockwood’s
name just now! No! I don’t believe you on your oath; I will believe
nobody but Miss Lockwood herself. Where does she live? Tell me that,
you noxious stinging little insect—and you may go.” Terrified as she
was, Mrs. Ferrari hesitated. Lady Montbarry lifted her hands
threateningly, with the long, lean, yellow-white fingers outspread and
crooked at the tips. Mrs. Ferrari shrank at the sight of them, and gave
the address. Lady Montbarry pointed contemptuously to the door—then
changed her mind. “No! not yet! you will tell Miss Lockwood what has
happened, and she may refuse to see me. I will go there at once, and
you shall go with me. As far as the house—not inside of it. Sit down
again. I am going to ring for my maid. Turn your back to the door—your
cowardly face is not fit to be seen!”

She rang the bell. The maid appeared.

“My cloak and bonnet—instantly!”

The maid produced the cloak and