The Project Gutenberg eBook of Charlotte Temple
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Charlotte Temple

Author: Mrs. Rowson


        
Release date: March 12, 2006 [eBook #171]
                Most recently updated: March 16, 2018

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/171

Credits: Produced by Judith Boss and David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHARLOTTE TEMPLE ***




Produced by Judith Boss and David Widger





CHARLOTTE TEMPLE

By Susanna Haswell Rowson



Contents:

CHAPTER I. A Boarding School.

CHAPTER II. Domestic Concerns.

CHAPTER III. Unexpected Misfortunes.

CHAPTER IV. Change of Fortune.

CHAPTER V. Such Things Are.

CHAPTER VI. An Intriguing Teacher.

CHAPTER VII. Natural Sense of Propriety Inherent in the Female Bosom.

CHAPTER VIII. Domestic Pleasures Planned.

CHAPTER IX. We Know Not What a Day May Bring Forth.

CHAPTER X. When We Have Excited Curiosity, It Is But an Act of
Good Nature to Gratify it.

CHAPTER XI. Conflict of Love and Duty.

CHAPTER XII. Nature's last, best gift: Creature in whom excell'd,
whatever could To sight or thought be nam'd! Holy, divine! good,
amiable, and sweet! How thou art falln'!--

CHAPTER XIII. Cruel Disappointment.

CHAPTER XIV. Maternal Sorrow.

CHAPTER XV. Embarkation.

CHAPTER XVI. Necessary Digression.

CHAPTER XVII. A Wedding.


VOLUME II.

CHAPTER XVIII. Reflections.

CHAPTER XIX. A Mistake Discovered.

CHAPTER XX. Virtue never appears so amiable as when reaching forth her
hand to raise a fallen sister. Chapter of Accidents.

CHAPTER XXI. Teach me to feel another's woe, To hide the fault I see,
That mercy I to others show That mercy show to me. POPE.

CHAPTER XXII. Sorrows of the Heart.

CHAPTER XXIII. A Man May Smile, and Smile, and Be a Villain.

CHAPTER XXIV. Mystery Developed.

CHAPTER XXV. Reception of a Letter.

CHAPTER XXVI. What Might Be Expected.

CHAPTER XXVII. Pensive she mourn'd, and hung her languid head, Like a
fair lily overcharg'd with dew.

CHAPTER XXVIII. A Trifling Retrospect.

CHAPTER XXIX. We Go Forward Again.

CHAPTER XXX. And what is friendship but a name, A charm that lulls to
sleep, A shade that follows wealth and fame, But leaves the wretch to
weep.

CHAPTER XXXI. Subject Continued.

CHAPTER XXXII. Reasons Why and Wherefore.

CHAPTER XXXIII. Which People Void of Feeling Need Not Read.

CHAPTER XXXIV. Retribution.

CHAPTER XXXV. Conclusion.





PREFACE.

FOR the perusal of the young and thoughtless of the fair sex, this Tale
of Truth is designed; and I could wish my fair readers to consider it as
not merely the effusion of Fancy, but as a reality. The circumstances
on which I have founded this novel were related to me some little time
since by an old lady who had personally known Charlotte, though she
concealed the real names of the characters, and likewise the place where
the unfortunate scenes were acted: yet as it was impossible to offer a
relation to the public in such an imperfect state, I have thrown over
the whole a slight veil of fiction, and substituted names and places
according to my own fancy. The principal characters in this little tale
are now consigned to the silent tomb: it can therefore hurt the feelings
of no one; and may, I flatter myself, be of service to some who are so
unfortunate as to have neither friends to advise, or understanding to
direct them, through the various and unexpected evils that attend a
young and unprotected woman in her first entrance into life.

While the tear of compassion still trembled in my eye for the fate of
the unhappy Charlotte, I may have children of my own, said I, to
whom this recital may be of use, and if to your own children, said
Benevolence, why not to the many daughters of Misfortune who, deprived
of natural friends, or spoilt by a mistaken education, are thrown on an
unfeeling world without the least power to defend themselves from the
snares not only of the other sex, but from the more dangerous arts of
the profligate of their own.

Sensible as I am that a novel writer, at a time when such a variety
of works are ushered into the world under that name, stands but a poor
chance for fame in the annals of literature, but conscious that I wrote
with a mind anxious for the happiness of that sex whose morals and
conduct have so powerful an influence on mankind in general; and
convinced that I have not wrote a line that conveys a wrong idea to
the head or a corrupt wish to the heart, I shall rest satisfied in the
purity of my own intentions, and if I merit not applause, I feel that I
dread not censure.

If the following tale should save one hapless fair one from the errors
which ruined poor Charlotte, or rescue from impending misery the heart
of one anxious parent, I shall feel a much higher gratification in
reflecting on this trifling performance, than could possibly result
from the applause which might attend the most elegant finished piece
of literature whose tendency might deprave the heart or mislead the
understanding.




CHARLOTTE TEMPLE,




VOLUME I



CHAPTER I.

A BOARDING SCHOOL.

“ARE you for a walk,” said Montraville to his companion, as they arose
from table; “are you for a walk? or shall we order the chaise and
proceed to Portsmouth?” Belcour preferred the former; and they sauntered
out to view the town, and to make remarks on the inhabitants, as they
returned from church.

Montraville was a Lieutenant in the army: Belcour was his brother
officer: they had been to take leave of their friends previous to their
departure for America, and were now returning to Portsmouth, where the
troops waited orders for embarkation. They had stopped at Chichester
to dine; and knowing they had sufficient time to reach the place of
destination before dark, and yet allow them a walk, had resolved, it
being Sunday afternoon, to take a survey of the Chichester ladies as
they returned from their devotions.

They had gratified their curiosity, and were preparing to return to the
inn without honouring any of the belles with particular notice, when
Madame Du Pont, at the head of her school, descended from the church.
Such an assemblage of youth and innocence naturally attracted the young
soldiers: they stopped; and, as the little cavalcade passed, almost
involuntarily pulled off their hats. A tall, elegant girl looked at
Montraville and blushed: he instantly recollected the features of
Charlotte Temple, whom he had once seen and danced with at a ball at
Portsmouth. At that time he thought on her only as a very lovely child,
she being then only thirteen; but the improvement two years had made in
her person, and the blush of recollection which suffused her cheeks as
she passed, awakened in his bosom new and pleasing ideas. Vanity led him
to think that pleasure at again beholding him might have occasioned the
emotion he had witnessed, and the same vanity led him to wish to see her
again.

“She is the sweetest girl in the world,” said he, as he entered the inn.
Belcour stared. “Did you not notice her?” continued Montraville: “she
had on a blue bonnet, and with a pair of lovely eyes of the same colour,
has contrived to make me feel devilish odd about the heart.”

“Pho,” said Belcour, “a musket ball from our friends, the Americans, may
in less than two months make you feel worse.”

“I never think of the future,” replied Montraville; “but am determined
to make the most of the present, and would willingly compound with any
kind Familiar who would inform me who the girl is, and how I might be
likely to obtain an interview.”

But no kind Familiar at that time appearing, and the chaise which they
had ordered, driving up to the door, Montraville and his companion were
obliged to take leave of Chichester and its fair inhabitant, and proceed
on their journey.

But Charlotte had made too great an impression on his mind to be easily
eradicated: having therefore spent three whole days in thinking on her
and in endeavouring to form some plan for seeing her, he determined
to set off for Chichester, and trust to chance either to favour or
frustrate his designs. Arriving at the verge of the town, he dismounted,
and sending the servant forward with the horses, proceeded toward the
place, where, in the midst of an extensive pleasure ground, stood the
mansion which contained the lovely Charlotte Temple. Montraville leaned
on a broken gate, and looked earnestly at the house. The wall which
surrounded it was high, and perhaps the Argus's who guarded the
Hesperian fruit within, were more watchful than those famed of old.

“'Tis a romantic attempt,” said he; “and should I even succeed in seeing
and conversing with her, it can be productive of no good: I must of
necessity leave England in a few days, and probably may never return;
why then should I endeavour to engage the affections of this lovely
girl, only to leave her a prey to a thousand inquietudes, of which at
present she has no idea? I will return to Portsmouth and think no more
about her.”

The evening now was closed; a serene stillness reigned; and the
chaste Queen of Night with her silver crescent faintly illuminated the
hemisphere. The mind of Montraville was hushed into composure by the
serenity of the surrounding objects. “I will think on her no more,” said
he, and turned with an intention to leave the place; but as he turned,
he saw the gate which led to the pleasure grounds open, and two women
come out, who walked arm-in-arm across the field.

“I will at least see who these are,” said he. He overtook them, and
giving them the compliments of the evening, begged leave to see them
into the more frequented parts of the town: but how was he delighted,
when, waiting for an answer, he discovered, under the concealment of a
large bonnet, the face of Charlotte Temple.

He soon found means to ingratiate himself with her companion, who was a
French teacher at the school, and, at parting, slipped a letter he had
purposely written, into Charlotte's hand, and five guineas into that of
Mademoiselle, who promised she would endeavour to bring her young charge
into the field again the next evening.




CHAPTER II.

DOMESTIC CONCERNS.

MR. Temple was the youngest son of a nobleman whose fortune was by no
means adequate to the antiquity, grandeur, and I may add, pride of the
family. He saw his elder brother made completely wretched by marrying a
disagreeable woman, whose fortune helped to prop the sinking dignity
of the house; and he beheld his sisters legally prostituted to old,
decrepid men, whose titles gave them consequence in the eyes of the
world, and whose affluence rendered them splendidly miserable. “I will
not sacrifice internal happiness for outward shew,” said he: “I will
seek Content; and, if I find her in a cottage, will embrace her with as
much cordiality as I should if seated on a throne.”

Mr. Temple possessed a small estate of about five hundred pounds a year;
and with that he resolved to preserve independence, to marry where the
feelings of his heart should direct him, and to confine his expenses
within the limits of his income. He had a heart open to every generous
feeling of humanity, and a hand ready to dispense to those who wanted
part of the blessings he enjoyed himself.

As he was universally known to be the friend of the unfortunate, his
advice and bounty was frequently solicited; nor was it seldom that he
sought out indigent merit, and raised it from obscurity, confining his
own expenses within a very narrow compass.

“You are a benevolent fellow,” said a young officer to him one day; “and
I have a great mind to give you a fine subject to exercise the goodness
of your heart upon.”

“You cannot oblige me more,” said Temple, “than to point out any way by
which I can be serviceable to my fellow creatures.”

“Come along then,” said the young man, “we will go and visit a man who
is not in so good a lodging as he deserves; and, were it not that he
has an angel with him, who comforts and supports him, he must long since
have sunk under his misfortunes.” The young man's heart was too full
to proceed; and Temple, unwilling to irritate his feelings by making
further enquiries, followed him in silence, til they arrived at the
Fleet prison.

The officer enquired for Captain Eldridge: a person led them up several
pair of dirty stairs, and pointing to a door which led to a miserable,
small apartment, said that was the Captain's room, and retired.

The officer, whose name was Blakeney, tapped at the door, and was bid to
enter by a voice melodiously soft. He opened the door, and discovered to
Temple a scene which rivetted him to the spot with astonishment.

The apartment, though small, and bearing strong marks of poverty, was
neat in the extreme. In an arm-chair, his head reclined upon his hand,
his eyes fixed on a book which lay open before him, sat an aged man in
a Lieutenant's uniform, which, though threadbare, would sooner call a
blush of shame into the face of those who could neglect real merit, than
cause the hectic of confusion to glow on the cheeks of him who wore it.

Beside him sat a lovely creature busied in painting a fan mount. She was
fair as the lily, but sorrow had nipped the rose in her cheek before it
was half blown. Her eyes were blue; and her hair, which was light brown,
was slightly confined under a plain muslin cap, tied round with a black
ribbon; a white linen gown and plain lawn handkerchief composed
the remainder of her dress; and in this simple attire, she was more
irresistibly charming to such a heart as Temple's, than she would have
been, if adorned with all the splendor of a courtly belle.

When they entered, the old man arose from his seat, and shaking Blakeney
by the hand with great cordiality, offered Temple his chair; and there
being but three in the room, seated himself on the side of his little
bed with evident composure.

“This is a strange place,” said he to Temple, “to receive visitors of
distinction in; but we must fit our feelings to our station. While I am
not ashamed to own the cause which brought me here, why should I blush
at my situation? Our misfortunes are not our faults; and were it not for
that poor girl--”

Here the philosopher was lost in the father. He rose hastily from his
seat, and walking toward the window, wiped off a tear which he was
afraid would tarnish the cheek of a sailor.

Temple cast his eye on Miss Eldridge: a pellucid drop had stolen from
her eyes, and fallen upon a rose she was painting. It blotted and
discoloured the flower. “'Tis emblematic,” said he mentally: “the rose
of youth and health soon fades when watered by the tear of affliction.”

“My friend Blakeney,” said he, addressing the old man, “told me I could
be of service to you: be so kind then, dear Sir, as to point out some
way in which I can relieve the anxiety of your heart and increase the
pleasures of my own.”

“My good young man,” said Eldridge, “you know not what you offer. While
deprived of my liberty I cannot be free from anxiety on my own account;
but that is a trifling concern; my anxious thoughts extend to one more
dear a thousand times than life: I am a poor weak old man, and must
expect in a few years to sink into silence and oblivion; but when I am
gone, who will protect that fair bud of innocence from the blasts of
adversity, or from the cruel hand of insult and dishonour.”

“Oh, my father!” cried Miss Eldridge, tenderly taking his hand, “be not
anxious on that account; for daily are my prayers offered to heaven that
our lives may terminate at the same instant, and one grave receive us
both; for why should I live when deprived of my only friend.”

Temple was moved even to tears. “You will both live many years,” said
he, “and I hope see much happiness. Cheerly, my friend, cheerly; these
passing clouds of adversity will serve only to make the sunshine of
prosperity more pleasing. But we are losing time: you might ere this
have told me who were your creditors, what were their demands, and other
particulars necessary to your liberation.”

“My story is short,” said Mr. Eldridge, “but there are some particulars
which will wring my heart barely to remember; yet to one whose offers
of friendship appear so open and disinterested, I will relate every
circumstance that led to my present, painful situation. But my child,”
 continued he, addressing his daughter, “let me prevail on you to take
this opportunity, while my friends are with me, to enjoy the benefit of
air and exercise.”

“Go, my love; leave me now; to-morrow at your usual hour I will expect
you.”

Miss Eldridge impressed on his cheek the kiss of filial affection, and
obeyed.




CHAPTER III.

UNEXPECTED MISFORTUNES.

“MY life,” said Mr. Eldridge, “till within these few years was marked by
no particular circumstance deserving notice. I early embraced the life
of a sailor, and have served my King with unremitted ardour for many
years. At the age of twenty-five I married an amiable woman; one son,
and the girl who just now left us, were the fruits of our union. My
boy had genius and spirit. I straitened my little income to give him a
liberal education, but the rapid progress he made in his studies amply
compensated for the inconvenience. At the academy where he received his
education he commenced an acquaintance with a Mr. Lewis, a young man
of affluent fortune: as they grew up their intimacy ripened into
friendship, and they became almost inseparable companions.

“George chose the profession of a soldier. I had neither friends or
money to procure him a commission, and had wished him to embrace a
nautical life: but this was repugnant to his wishes, and I ceased to
urge him on the subject.

“The friendship subsisting between Lewis and my son was of such a nature
as gave him free access to our family; and so specious was his manner
that we hesitated not to state to him all our little difficulties in
regard to George's future views. He listened to us with attention, and
offered to advance any sum necessary for his first setting out.

“I embraced the offer, and gave him my note for the payment of it, but
he would not suffer me to mention any stipulated time, as he said I
might do it whenever most convenient to myself. About this time my dear
Lucy returned from school, and I soon began to imagine Lewis looked at
her with eyes of affection. I gave my child a caution to beware of him,
and to look on her mother as her friend. She was unaffectedly artless;
and when, as I suspected, Lewis made professions of love, she confided
in her parents, and assured us her heart was perfectly unbiassed in his
favour, and she would cheerfully submit to our direction.

“I took an early opportunity of questioning him concerning his
intentions towards my child: he gave an equivocal answer, and I forbade
him the house.

“The next day he sent and demanded payment of his money. It was not in
my power to comply with the demand. I requested three days to endeavour
to raise it, determining in that time to mortgage my half pay, and live
on a small annuity which my wife possessed, rather than be under an
obligation to so worthless a man: but this short time was not allowed
me; for that evening, as I was sitting down to supper, unsuspicious of
danger, an officer entered, and tore me from the embraces of my family.

“My wife had been for some time in a declining state of health: ruin at
once so unexpected and inevitable was a stroke she was not prepared to
bear, and I saw her faint into the arms of our servant, as I left my
own habitation for the comfortless walls of a prison. My poor Lucy,
distracted with her fears for us both, sunk on the floor and endeavoured
to detain me by her feeble efforts, but in vain; they forced open her
arms; she shrieked, and fell prostrate. But pardon me. The horrors of
that night unman me. I cannot proceed.”

He rose from his seat, and walked several times across the room: at
length, attaining more composure, he cried--“What a mere infant I am!
Why, Sir, I never felt thus in the day of battle.” “No,” said Temple;
“but the truly brave soul is tremblingly alive to the feelings of
humanity.”

“True,” replied the old man, (something like satisfaction darting across
his features) “and painful as these feelings are, I would not exchange
them for that torpor which the stoic mistakes for philosophy. How many
exquisite delights should I have passed by unnoticed, but for these keen
sensations, this quick sense of happiness or misery? Then let us, my
friend, take the cup of life as it is presented to us, tempered by the
hand of a wise Providence; be thankful for the good, be patient under
the evil, and presume not to enquire why the latter predominates.”

“This is true philosophy,” said Temple.

“'Tis the only way to reconcile ourselves to the cross events of life,”
 replied he. “But I forget myself. I will not longer intrude on your
patience, but proceed in my melancholy tale.

“The very evening that I was taken to prison, my son arrived from
Ireland, where he had been some time with his regiment. From the
distracted expressions of his mother and sister, he learnt by whom I
had been arrested; and, late as it was, flew on the wings of wounded
affection, to the house of his false friend, and earnestly enquired the
cause of this cruel conduct. With all the calmness of a cool deliberate
villain, he avowed his passion for Lucy; declared her situation in
life would not permit him to marry her; but offered to release me
immediately, and make any settlement on her, if George would persuade
her to live, as he impiously termed it, a life of honour.

“Fired at the insult offered to a man and a soldier, my boy struck the
villain, and a challenge ensued. He then went to a coffee-house in
the neighbourhood and wrote a long affectionate letter to me, blaming
himself severely for having introduced Lewis into the family, or
permitted him to confer an obligation, which had brought inevitable
ruin on us all. He begged me, whatever might be the event of the ensuing
morning, not to suffer regret or unavailing sorrow for his fate, to
increase the anguish of my heart, which he greatly feared was already
insupportable.

“This letter was delivered to me early in the morning. It would be vain
to attempt describing my feelings on the perusal of it; suffice it to
say, that a merciful Providence interposed, and I was for three weeks
insensible to miseries almost beyond the strength of human nature to
support.

“A fever and strong delirium seized me, and my life was despaired of. At
length, nature, overpowered with fatigue, gave way to the salutary power
of rest, and a quiet slumber of some hours restored me to reason, though
the extreme weakness of my frame prevented my feeling my distress so
acutely as I otherways should.

“The first object that struck me on awaking, was Lucy sitting by my
bedside; her pale countenance and sable dress prevented my enquiries for
poor George: for the letter I had received from him, was the first thing
that occurred to my memory. By degrees the rest returned: I recollected
being arrested, but could no ways account for being in this apartment,
whither they had conveyed me during my illness.

“I was so weak as to be almost unable to speak. I pressed Lucy's hand,
and looked earnestly round the apartment in search of another dear
object.

“Where is your mother?” said I, faintly.

“The poor girl could not answer: she shook her head in expressive
silence; and throwing herself on the bed, folded her arms about me, and
burst into tears.

“What! both gone?” said I.

“Both,” she replied, endeavouring to restrain her emotions: “but they
are happy, no doubt.”

Here Mr. Eldridge paused: the recollection of the scene was too painful
to permit him to proceed.




CHAPTER IV.

CHANGE OF FORTUNE.

“IT was some days,” continued Mr. Eldridge, recovering himself, “before
I could venture to enquire the particulars of what had happened during
my illness: at length I assumed courage to ask my dear girl how long her
mother and brother had been dead: she told me, that the morning after
my arrest, George came home early to enquire after his mother's health,
staid with them but a few minutes, seemed greatly agitated at parting,
but gave them strict charge to keep up their spirits, and hope every
thing would turn out for the best. In about two hours after, as they
were sitting at breakfast, and endeavouring to strike out some plan to
attain my liberty, they heard a loud rap at the door, which Lucy running
to open, she met the bleeding body of her brother, borne in by two men
who had lifted him from a litter, on which they had brought him from
the place where he fought. Her poor mother, weakened by illness and the
struggles of the preceding night, was not able to support this shock;
gasping for breath, her looks wild and haggard, she reached the
apartment where they had carried her dying son. She knelt by the bed
side; and taking his cold hand, 'my poor boy,' said she, 'I will not be
parted from thee: husband! son! both at once lost. Father of mercies,
spare me!' She fell into a strong convulsion, and expired in about two
hours. In the mean time, a surgeon had dressed George's wounds; but they
were in such a situation as to bar the smallest hopes of recovery. He
never was sensible from the time he was brought home, and died that
evening in the arms of his sister.

“Late as it was when this event took place, my affectionate Lucy
insisted on coming to me. 'What must he feel,' said she, 'at our
apparent neglect, and how shall I inform him of the afflictions with
which it has pleased heaven to visit us?'

“She left the care of the dear departed ones to some neighbours who
had kindly come in to comfort and assist her; and on entering the house
where I was confined, found me in the situation I have mentioned.

“How she supported herself in these trying moments, I know not: heaven,
no doubt, was with her; and her anxiety to preserve the life of one
parent in some measure abated her affliction for the loss of the other.

“My circumstances were greatly embarrassed, my acquaintance few,
and those few utterly unable to assist me. When my wife and son were
committed to their kindred earth, my creditors seized my house and
furniture, which not being sufficient to discharge all their demands,
detainers were lodged against me. No friend stepped forward to my
relief; from the grave of her mother, my beloved Lucy followed an almost
dying father to this melancholy place.

“Here we have been nearly a year and a half. My half-pay I have given
up to satisfy my creditors, and my child supports me by her industry:
sometimes by fine needlework, sometimes by painting. She leaves me
every night, and goes to a lodging near the bridge; but returns in
the morning, to cheer me with her smiles, and bless me by her duteous
affection. A lady once offered her an asylum in her family; but she
would not leave me. 'We are all the world to each other,' said she. 'I
thank God, I have health and spirits to improve the talents with which
nature has endowed me; and I trust if I employ them in the support of a
beloved parent, I shall not be thought an unprofitable servant. While he
lives, I pray for strength to pursue my employment; and when it pleases
heaven to take one of us, may it give the survivor resignation to bear
the separation as we ought: till then I will never leave him.'”

“But where is this inhuman persecutor?” said Temple.

“He has been abroad ever since,” replied the old man; “but he has
left orders with his lawyer never to give up the note till the utmost
farthing is paid.”

“And how much is the amount of your debts in all?” said Temple.

“Five hundred pounds,” he replied.

Temple started: it was more than he expected. “But something must be
done,” said he: “that sweet maid must not wear out her life in a prison.
I will see you again to-morrow, my friend,” said he, shaking Eldridge's
hand: “keep up your spirits: light and shade are not more happily
blended than are the pleasures and pains of life; and the horrors of the
one serve only to increase the splendor of the other.”

“You never lost a wife and son,” said Eldridge.

“No,” replied he, “but I can feel for those that have.” Eldridge pressed
his hand as they went toward the door, and they parted in silence.

When they got without the walls of the prison, Temple thanked his friend
Blakeney for introducing him to so worthy a character; and telling him
he had a particular engagement in the city, wished him a good evening.

“And what is to be done for this distressed man,” said Temple, as he
walked up Ludgate Hill. “Would to heaven I had a fortune that would
enable me instantly to discharge his debt: what exquisite transport, to
see the expressive eyes of Lucy beaming at once with pleasure for her
father's deliverance, and gratitude for her deliverer: but is not my
fortune affluence,” continued he, “nay superfluous wealth, when compared
to the extreme indigence of Eldridge; and what have I done to deserve
ease and plenty, while a brave worthy officer starves in a prison? Three
hundred a year is surely sufficient for all my wants and wishes: at any
rate Eldridge must be relieved.”

When the heart has will, the hands can soon find means to execute a good
action.

Temple was a young man, his feelings warm and impetuous; unacquainted
with the world, his heart had not been rendered callous by being
convinced of its fraud and hypocrisy. He pitied their sufferings,
overlooked their faults, thought every bosom as generous as his own, and
would cheerfully have divided his last guinea with an unfortunate fellow
creature.

No wonder, then, that such a man (without waiting a moment for the
interference of Madam Prudence) should resolve to raise money sufficient
for the relief of Eldridge, by mortgaging part of his fortune.

We will not enquire too minutely into the cause which might actuate
him in this instance: suffice it to say, he immediately put the plan in
execution; and in three days from the time he first saw the unfortunate
Lieutenant, he had the superlative felicity of seeing him at liberty,
and receiving an ample reward in the tearful eye and half articulated
thanks of the grateful Lucy.

“And pray, young man,” said his father to him one morning, “what are
your designs in visiting thus constantly that old man and his daughter?”

Temple was at a loss for a reply: he had never asked himself the
question: he hesitated; and his father continued--

“It was not till within these few days that I heard in what manner
your acquaintance first commenced, and cannot suppose any thing but
attachment to the daughter could carry you such imprudent lengths for
the father: it certainly must be her art that drew you in to mortgage
part of your fortune.”

“Art, Sir!” cried Temple eagerly. “Lucy Eldridge is as free from art as
she is from every other error: she is--”

“Everything that is amiable and lovely,” said his father, interrupting
him ironically: “no doubt in your opinion she is a pattern of excellence
for all her sex to follow; but come, Sir, pray tell me what are your
designs towards this paragon. I hope you do not intend to complete your
folly by marrying her.”

“Were my fortune such as would support her according to her merit,
I don't know a woman more formed to insure happiness in the married
state.”

“Then prithee, my dear lad,” said his father, “since your rank and
fortune are so much beneath what your PRINCESS might expect, be so kind
as to turn your eyes on Miss Weatherby; who, having only an estate of
three thousand a year, is more upon a level with you, and whose father
yesterday solicited the mighty honour of your alliance. I shall leave
you to consider on this offer; and pray remember, that your union with
Miss Weatherby will put it in your power to be more liberally the friend
of Lucy Eldridge.”

The old gentleman walked in a stately manner out of the room; and Temple
stood almost petrified with astonishment, contempt, and rage.




CHAPTER V.

SUCH THINGS ARE.

MISS Weatherby was the only child of a wealthy man, almost idolized by
her parents, flattered by her dependants, and never contradicted even
by those who called themselves her friends: I cannot give a better
description than by the following lines.

     The lovely maid whose form and face
     Nature has deck'd with ev'ry grace,
     But in whose breast no virtues glow,
     Whose heart ne'er felt another's woe,
     Whose hand ne'er smooth'd the bed of pain,
     Or eas'd the captive's galling chain;
     But like the tulip caught the eye,
     Born just to be admir'd and die;
     When gone, no one regrets its loss,
     Or scarce remembers that it was.

Such was Miss Weatherby: her form lovely as nature could make it, but
her mind uncultivated, her heart unfeeling, her passions impetuous, and
her brain almost turned with flattery, dissipation, and pleasure; and
such was the girl, whom a partial grandfather left independent mistress
of the fortune before mentioned.

She had seen Temple frequently; and fancying she could never be happy
without him, nor once imagining he could refuse a girl of her beauty and
fortune, she prevailed on her fond father to offer the alliance to the
old Earl of D----, Mr. Temple's father.

The Earl had received the offer courteously: he thought it a great match
for Henry; and was too fashionable a man to suppose a wife could be any
impediment to the friendship he professed for Eldridge and his daughter.

Unfortunately for Temple, he thought quite otherwise: the conversation
he had just had with his father, discovered to him the situation of
his heart; and he found that the most affluent fortune would bring no
increase of happiness unless Lucy Eldridge shared it with him; and the
knowledge of the purity of her sentiments, and the integrity of his own
heart, made him shudder at the idea his father had started, of marrying
a woman for no other reason than because the affluence of her fortune
would enable him to injure her by maintaining in splendor the woman
to whom his heart was devoted: he therefore resolved to refuse Miss
Weatherby, and be the event what it might, offer his heart and hand to
Lucy Eldridge.

Full of this determination, he fought his father, declared his
resolution, and was commanded never more to appear in his presence.
Temple bowed; his heart was too full to permit him to speak; he left the
house precipitately, and hastened to relate the cause of his sorrows to
his good old friend and his amiable daughter.

In the mean time, the Earl, vexed to the soul that such a fortune should
be lost, determined to offer himself a candidate for Miss Weatherby's
favour.

What wonderful changes are wrought by that reigning power, ambition! the
love-sick girl, when first she heard of Temple's refusal, wept, raved,
tore her hair, and vowed to found a protestant nunnery with her fortune;
and by commencing abbess, shut herself up from the sight of cruel
ungrateful man for ever.

Her father was a man of the world: he suffered this first transport to
subside, and then very deliberately unfolded to her the offers of the
old Earl, expatiated on the many benefits arising from an elevated
title, painted in glowing colours the surprise and vexation of Temple
when he should see her figuring as a Countess and his mother-in-law, and
begged her to consider well before she made any rash vows.

The DISTRESSED fair one dried her tears, listened patiently, and at
length declared she believed the surest method to revenge the slight put
on her by the son, would be to accept the father: so said so done, and
in a few days she became the Countess D----.

Temple heard the news with emotion: he had lost his father's favour
by avowing his passion for Lucy, and he saw now there was no hope of
regaining it: “but he shall not make me miserable,” said he. “Lucy and I
have no ambitious notions: we can live on three hundred a year for
some little time, till the mortgage is paid off, and then we shall have
sufficient not only for the comforts but many of the little elegancies
of life. We will purchase a little cottage, my Lucy,” said he, “and
thither with your reverend father we will retire; we will forget there
are such things as splendor, profusion, and dissipation: we will have
some cows, and you shall be queen of the dairy; in a morning, while I
look after my garden, you shall take a basket on your arm, and sally
forth to feed your poultry; and as they flutter round you in token of
humble gratitude, your father shall smoke his pipe in a woodbine alcove,
and viewing the serenity of your countenance, feel such real pleasure
dilate his own heart, as shall make him forget he had ever been
unhappy.”

Lucy smiled; and Temple saw it was a smile of approbation. He sought
and found a cottage suited to his taste; thither, attended by Love and
Hymen, the happy trio retired; where, during many years of uninterrupted
felicity, they cast not a wish beyond the little boundaries of their own
tenement. Plenty, and her handmaid, Prudence, presided at their board,
Hospitality stood at their gate, Peace smiled on each face, Content
reigned in each heart, and Love and Health strewed roses on their
pillows.

Such were the parents of Charlotte Temple, who was the only pledge of
their mutual love, and who, at the earnest entreaty of a particular
friend, was permitted to finish the education her mother had begun,
at Madame Du Pont's school, where we first introduced her to the
acquaintance of the reader.




CHAPTER VI.

AN INTRIGUING TEACHER.

MADAME Du Pont was a woman every way calculated to take the care of
young ladies, had that care entirely devolved on herself; but it was
impossible to attend the education of a numerous school without proper
assistants; and those assistants were not always the kind of people
whose conversation and morals were exactly such as parents of delicacy
and refinement would wish a daughter to copy. Among the teachers
at Madame Du Pont's school, was Mademoiselle La Rue, who added to a
pleasing person and insinuating address, a liberal education and the
manners of a gentlewoman. She was recommended to the school by a lady
whose humanity overstepped the bounds of discretion: for though she
knew Miss La Rue had eloped from a convent with a young officer, and, on
coming to England, had lived with several different men in open defiance
of all moral and religious duties; yet, finding her reduced to the
most abject want, and believing the penitence which she professed to be
sincere, she took her into her own family, and from thence recommended
her to Madame Du Pont, as thinking the situation more suitable for
a woman of her abilities. But Mademoiselle possessed too much of the
spirit of intrigue to remain long without adventures. At church, where
she constantly appeared, her person attracted the attention of a young
man who was upon a visit at a gentleman's seat in the neighbourhood: she
had met him several times clandestinely; and being invited to come out
that evening, and eat some fruit and pastry in a summer-house belonging
to the gentleman he was visiting, and requested to bring some of
the ladies with her, Charlotte being her favourite, was fixed on to
accompany her.

The mind of youth eagerly catches at promised pleasure: pure and
innocent by nature, it thinks not of the dangers lurking beneath
those pleasures, till too late to avoid them: when Mademoiselle asked
Charlotte to go with her, she mentioned the gentleman as a relation,
and spoke in such high terms of the elegance of his gardens, the
sprightliness of his conversation, and the liberality with which he ever
entertained his guests, that Charlotte thought only of the pleasure she
should enjoy in the visit,--not on the imprudence of going without her
governess's knowledge, or of the danger to which she exposed herself in
visiting the house of a gay young man of fashion.

Madame Du Pont was gone out for the evening, and the rest of the ladies
retired to rest, when Charlotte and the teacher stole out at the back
gate, and in crossing the field, were accosted by Montraville, as
mentioned in the first CHAPTER.

Charlotte was disappointed in the pleasure she had promised herself
from this visit. The levity of the gentlemen and the freedom of
their conversation disgusted her. She was astonished at the liberties
Mademoiselle permitted them to take; grew thoughtful and uneasy, and
heartily wished herself at home again in her own chamber.

Perhaps one cause of that wish might be, an earnest desire to see the
contents of the letter which had been put into her hand by Montraville.

Any reader who has the least knowledge of the world, will easily
imagine the letter was made up of encomiums on her beauty, and vows of
everlasting love and constancy; nor will he be surprised that a heart
open to every gentle, generous sentiment, should feel itself warmed by
gratitude for a man who professed to feel so much for her; nor is it
improbable but her mind might revert to the agreeable person and martial
appearance of Montraville.

In affairs of love, a young heart is never in more danger than
when attempted by a handsome young soldier. A man of an indifferent
appearance, will, when arrayed in a military habit, shew to advantage;
but when beauty of person, elegance of manner, and an easy method of
paying compliments, are united to the scarlet coat, smart cockade, and
military sash, ah! well-a-day for the poor girl who gazes on him: she
is in imminent danger; but if she listens to him with pleasure, 'tis all
over with her, and from that moment she has neither eyes nor ears for
any other object.

Now, my dear sober matron, (if a sober matron should deign to turn over
these pages, before she trusts them to the eye of a darling daughter,)
let me intreat you not to put on a grave face, and throw down the book
in a passion and declare 'tis enough to turn the heads of half the girls
in England; I do solemnly protest, my dear madam, I mean no more by
what I have here advanced, than to ridicule those romantic girls, who
foolishly imagine a red coat and silver epaulet constitute the fine
gentleman; and should that fine gentleman make half a dozen fine
speeches to them, they will imagine themselves so much in love as
to fancy it a meritorious action to jump out of a two pair of stairs
window, abandon their friends, and trust entirely to the honour of a
man, who perhaps hardly knows the meaning of the word, and if he does,
will be too much the modern man of refinement, to practice it in their
favour.

Gracious heaven! when I think on the miseries that must rend the heart
of a doating parent, when he sees the darling of his age at first
seduced from his protection, and afterwards abandoned, by the very
wretch whose promises of love decoyed her from the paternal roof--when
he sees her poor and wretched, her bosom tom between remorse for her
crime and love for her vile betrayer--when fancy paints to me the good
old man stooping to raise the weeping penitent, while every tear from
her eye is numbered by drops from his bleeding heart, my bosom glows
with honest indignation, and I wish for power to extirpate those
monsters of seduction from the earth.

Oh my dear girls--for to such only am I writing--listen not to the voice
of love, unless sanctioned by paternal approbation: be assured, it is
now past the days of romance: no woman can be run away with contrary
to her own inclination: then kneel down each morning, and request kind
heaven to keep you free from temptation, or, should it please to suffer
you to be tried, pray for fortitude to resist the impulse of inclination
when it runs counter to the precepts of religion and virtue.




CHAPTER VII.

NATURAL SENSE OF PROPRIETY INHERENT IN THE FEMALE BOSOM.

“I CANNOT think we have done exactly right in going out this evening,
Mademoiselle,” said Charlotte, seating herself when she entered her
apartment: “nay, I am sure it was not right; for I expected to be very
happy, but was sadly disappointed.”

“It was your own fault, then,” replied Mademoiselle: “for I am sure
my cousin omitted nothing that could serve to render the evening
agreeable.”

“True,” said Charlotte: “but I thought the gentlemen were very free in
their manner: I wonder you would suffer them to behave as they did.”

“Prithee, don't be such a foolish little prude,” said the artful woman,
affecting anger: “I invited you to go in hopes it would divert you, and
be an agreeable change of scene; however, if your delicacy was hurt by
the behaviour of the gentlemen, you need not go again; so there let it
rest.”

“I do not intend to go again,” said Charlotte, gravely taking off her
bonnet, and beginning to prepare for bed: “I am sure, if Madame Du Pont
knew we had been out to-night, she would be very angry; and it is ten to
one but she hears of it by some means or other.”

“Nay, Miss,” said La Rue, “perhaps your mighty sense of propriety may
lead you to tell her yourself: and in order to avoid the censure you
would incur, should she hear of it by accident, throw the blame on
me: but I confess I deserve it: it will be a very kind return for that
partiality which led me to prefer you before any of the rest of the
ladies; but perhaps it will give you pleasure,” continued she, letting
fall some hypocritical tears, “to see me deprived of bread, and for an
action which by the most rigid could only be esteemed an inadvertency,
lose my place and character, and be driven again into the world, where I
have already suffered all the evils attendant on poverty.”

This was touching Charlotte in the most vulnerable part: she rose from
her seat, and taking Mademoiselle's hand--“You know, my dear La Rue,”
 said she, “I love you too well, to do anything that would injure you in
my governess's opinion: I am only sorry we went out this evening.”

“I don't believe it, Charlotte,” said she, assuming a little vivacity;
“for if you had not gone out, you would not have seen the gentleman who
met us crossing the field; and I rather think you were pleased with his
conversation.”

“I had seen him once before,” replied Charlotte, “and thought him an
agreeable man; and you know one is always pleased to see a person with
whom one has passed several cheerful hours. But,” said she pausing,
and drawing the letter from her pocket, while a gentle suffusion of
vermillion tinged her neck and face, “he gave me this letter; what shall
I do with it?”

“Read it, to be sure,” returned Mademoiselle.

“I am afraid I ought not,” said Charlotte: “my mother has often told
me, I should never read a letter given me by a young man, without first
giving it to her.”

“Lord bless you, my dear girl,” cried the teacher smiling, “have you
a mind to be in leading strings all your life time. Prithee open the
letter, read it, and judge for yourself; if you show it your mother, the
consequence will be, you will be taken from school, and a strict guard
kept over you; so you will stand no chance of ever seeing the smart
young officer again.”

“I should not like to leave school yet,” replied Charlotte, “till I have
attained a greater proficiency in my Italian and music. But you can, if
you please, Mademoiselle, take the letter back to Montraville, and
tell him I wish him well, but cannot, with any propriety, enter into a
clandestine correspondence with him.” She laid the letter on the table,
and began to undress herself.

“Well,” said La Rue, “I vow you are an unaccountable girl: have you
no curiosity to see the inside now? for my part I could no more let a
letter addressed to me lie unopened so long, than I could work miracles:
he writes a good hand,” continued she, turning the letter, to look at
the superscription.

“'Tis well enough,” said Charlotte, drawing it towards her.

“He is a genteel young fellow,” said La Rue carelessly, folding up her
apron at the same time; “but I think he is marked with the small pox.”

“Oh you are greatly mistaken,” said Charlotte eagerly; “he has a
remarkable clear skin and fine complexion.”

“His eyes, if I could judge by what I saw,” said La Rue, “are grey and
want expression.”

“By no means,” replied Charlotte; “they are the most expressive eyes
I ever saw.” “Well, child, whether they are grey or black is of no
consequence: you have determined not to read his letter; so it is likely
you will never either see or hear from him again.”

Charlotte took up the letter, and Mademoiselle continued--

“He is most probably going to America; and if ever you should hear any
account of him, it may possibly be that he is killed; and though he
loved you ever so fervently, though his last breath should be spent in
a prayer for your happiness, it can be nothing to you: you can feel
nothing for the fate of the man, whose letters you will not open, and
whose sufferings you will not alleviate, by permitting him to think you
would remember him when absent, and pray for his safety.”

Charlotte still held the letter in her hand: her heart swelled at the
conclusion of Mademoiselle's speech, and a tear dropped upon the wafer
that closed it.

“The wafer is not dry yet,” said she, “and sure there can be no great
harm--” She hesitated. La Rue was silent. “I may read it, Mademoiselle,
and return it afterwards.”

“Certainly,” replied Mademoiselle.

“At any rate I am determined not to answer it,” continued Charlotte, as
she opened the letter.

Here let me stop to make one remark, and trust me my very heart aches
while I write it; but certain I am, that when once a woman has stifled
the sense of shame in her own bosom, when once she has lost sight of the
basis on which reputation, honour, every thing that should be dear to
the female heart, rests, she grows hardened in guilt, and will spare
no pains to bring down innocence and beauty to the shocking level with
herself: and this proceeds from that diabolical spirit of envy, which
repines at seeing another in the full possession of that respect and
esteem which she can no longer hope to enjoy.

Mademoiselle eyed the unsuspecting Charlotte, as she perused the letter,
with a malignant pleasure. She saw, that the contents had awakened new
emotions in her youthful bosom: she encouraged her hopes, calmed her
fears, and before they parted for the night, it was determined that she
should meet Montraville the ensuing evening.




CHAPTER VIII.

DOMESTIC PLEASURES PLANNED.

“I THINK, my dear,” said Mrs. Temple, laying her hand on her husband's
arm as they were walking together in the garden, “I think next Wednesday
is Charlotte's birth day: now I have formed a little scheme in my own
mind, to give her an agreeable surprise; and if you have no objection,
we will send for her home on that day.” Temple pressed his wife's hand
in token of approbation, and she proceeded.--“You know the little alcove
at the bottom of the garden, of which Charlotte is so fond? I have an
inclination to deck this out in a fanciful manner, and invite all her
little friends to partake of a collation of fruit, sweetmeats, and other
things suitable to the general taste of young guests; and to make it
more pleasing to Charlotte, she shall be mistress of the feast, and
entertain her visitors in this alcove. I know she will be delighted; and
to complete all, they shall have some music, and finish with a dance.”

“A very fine plan, indeed,” said Temple, smiling; “and you really
suppose I will wink at your indulging the girl in this manner? You will
quite spoil her, Lucy; indeed you will.”

“She is the only child we have,” said Mrs. Temple, the whole tenderness
of a mother adding animation to her fine countenance; but it was withal
tempered so sweetly with the meek affection and submissive duty of the
wife, that as she paused expecting her husband's answer, he gazed at her
tenderly, and found he was unable to refuse her request.

“She is a good girl,” said Temple.

“She is, indeed,” replied the fond mother exultingly, “a grateful,
affectionate girl; and I am sure will never lose sight of the duty she
owes her parents.”

“If she does,” said he, “she must forget the example set her by the best
of mothers.”

Mrs. Temple could not reply; but the delightful sensation that dilated
her heart sparkled in her intelligent eyes and heightened the vermillion
on her cheeks.

Of all the pleasures of which the human mind is sensible, there is
none equal to that which warms and expands the bosom, when listening to
commendations bestowed on us by a beloved object, and are conscious of
having deserved them.

Ye giddy flutterers in the fantastic round of dissipation, who eagerly
seek pleasure in the lofty dome, rich treat, and midnight revel--tell
me, ye thoughtless daughters of folly, have ye ever found the phantom
you have so long sought with such unremitted assiduity? Has she not
always eluded your grasp, and when you have reached your hand to take
the cup she extends to her deluded votaries, have you not found the
long-expected draught strongly tinctured with the bitter dregs of
disappointment? I know you have: I see it in the wan cheek, sunk
eye, and air of chagrin, which ever mark the children of dissipation.
Pleasure is a vain illusion; she draws you on to a thousand follies,
errors, and I may say vices, and then leaves you to deplore your
thoughtless credulity.

Look, my dear friends, at yonder lovely Virgin, arrayed in a white robe
devoid of ornament; behold the meekness of her countenance, the
modesty of her gait; her handmaids are Humility, Filial Piety, Conjugal
Affection, Industry, and Benevolence; her name is CONTENT; she holds
in her hand the cup of true felicity, and when once you have formed an
intimate acquaintance with these her attendants, nay you must admit them
as your bosom friends and chief counsellors, then, whatever may be your
situation in life, the meek eyed Virgin wig immediately take up her
abode with you.

Is poverty your portion?--she will lighten your labours, preside at your
frugal board, and watch your quiet slumbers.

Is your state mediocrity?--she will heighten every blessing you enjoy,
by informing you how grateful you should be to that bountiful Providence
who might have placed you in the most abject situation; and, by teaching
you to weigh your blessings against your deserts, show you how much more
you receive than you have a right to expect.

Are you possessed of affluence?--what an inexhaustible fund of happiness
will she lay before you! To relieve the distressed, redress the injured,
in short, to perform all the good works of peace and mercy.

Content, my dear friends, will blunt even the arrows of adversity, so
that they cannot materially harm you. She will dwell in the humblest
cottage; she will attend you even to a prison. Her parent is Religion;
her sisters, Patience and Hope. She will pass with you through life,
smoothing the rough paths and tread to earth those thorns which every
one must meet with as they journey onward to the appointed goal. She
will soften the pains of sickness, continue with you even in the
cold gloomy hour of death, and, cheating you with the smiles of her
heaven-born sister, Hope, lead you triumphant to a blissful eternity.

I confess I have rambled strangely from my story: but what of that? if
I have been so lucky as to find the road to happiness, why should I be
such a niggard as to omit so good an opportunity of pointing out the way
to others. The very basis of true peace of mind is a benevolent wish to
see all the world as happy as one's Self; and from my soul do I pity the
selfish churl, who, remembering the little bickerings of anger, envy,
and fifty other disagreeables to which frail mortality is subject, would
wish to revenge the affront which pride whispers him he has received.
For my own part, I can safely declare, there is not a human being in
the universe, whose prosperity I should not rejoice in, and to whose
happiness I would not contribute to the utmost limit of my power: and
may my offences be no more remembered in the day of general retribution,
than as from my soul I forgive every offence or injury received from a
fellow creature.

Merciful heaven! who would exchange the rapture of such a reflexion for
all the gaudy tinsel which the world calls pleasure!

But to return.--Content dwelt in Mrs. Temple's bosom, and spread a
charming animation over her countenance, as her husband led her in, to
lay the plan she had formed (for the celebration of Charlotte's birth
day,) before Mr. Eldridge.




CHAPTER IX.

WE KNOW NOT WHAT A DAY MAY BRING FORTH.

VARIOUS were the sensations which agitated the mind of Charlotte, during
the day preceding the evening in which she was to meet Montraville.
Several times did she almost resolve to go to her governess, show her
the letter, and be guided by her advice: but Charlotte had taken one
step in the ways of imprudence; and when that is once done, there are
always innumerable obstacles to prevent the erring person returning to
the path of rectitude: yet these obstacles, however forcible they may
appear in general, exist chiefly in imagination.

Charlotte feared the anger of her governess: she loved her mother,
and the very idea of incurring her displeasure, gave her the greatest
uneasiness: but there was a more forcible reason still remaining: should
she show the letter to Madame Du Pont, she must confess the means by
which it came into her possession; and what would be the consequence?
Mademoiselle would be turned out of doors.

“I must not be ungrateful,” said she. “La Rue is very kind to me;
besides I can, when I see Montraville, inform him of the impropriety of
our continuing to see or correspond with each other, and request him to
come no more to Chichester.”

However prudent Charlotte might be in these resolutions, she certainly
did not take a proper method to confirm herself in them. Several times
in the course of the day, she indulged herself in reading over the
letter, and each time she read it, the contents sunk deeper in her
heart. As evening drew near, she caught herself frequently consulting
her watch. “I wish this foolish meeting was over,” said she, by way of
apology to her own heart, “I wish it was over; for when I have seen him,
and convinced him my resolution is not to be shaken, I shall feel my
mind much easier.”

The appointed hour arrived. Charlotte and Mademoiselle eluded the eye of
vigilance; and Montraville, who had waited their coming with impatience,
received them with rapturous and unbounded acknowledgments for their
condescension: he had wisely brought Belcour with him to entertain
Mademoiselle, while he enjoyed an uninterrupted conversation with
Charlotte.

Belcour was a man whose character might be comprised in a few words; and
as he will make some figure in the ensuing pages, I shall here describe
him. He possessed a genteel fortune, and had a liberal education;
dissipated, thoughtless, and capricious, he paid little regard to
the moral duties, and less to religious ones: eager in the pursuit of
pleasure, he minded not the miseries he inflicted on others, provided
his own wishes, however extravagant, were gratified. Self, darling self,
was the idol he worshipped, and to that he would have sacrificed
the interest and happiness of all mankind. Such was the friend of
Montraville: will not the reader be ready to imagine, that the man who
could regard such a character, must be actuated by the same feelings,
follow the same pursuits, and be equally unworthy with the person to
whom he thus gave his confidence?

But Montraville was a different character: generous in his disposition,
liberal in his opinions, and good-natured almost to a fault; yet eager
and impetuous in the pursuit of a favorite object, he staid not to
reflect on the consequence which might follow the attainment of his
wishes; with a mind ever open to conviction, had he been so fortunate
as to possess a friend who would have pointed out the cruelty of
endeavouring to gain the heart of an innocent artless girl, when he
knew it was utterly impossible for him to marry her, and when the
gratification of his passion would be unavoidable infamy and misery to
her, and a cause of never-ceasing remorse to himself: had these dreadful
consequences been placed before him in a proper light, the humanity of
his nature would have urged him to give up the pursuit: but Belcour
was not this friend; he rather encouraged the growing passion of
Montraville; and being pleased with the vivacity of Mademoiselle,
resolved to leave no argument untried, which he thought might prevail on
her to be the companion of their intended voyage; and he made no doubt
but her example, added to the rhetoric of Montraville, would persuade
Charlotte to go with them.

Charlotte had, when she went out to meet Montraville, flattered herself
that her resolution was not to be shaken, and that, conscious of the
impropriety of her conduct in having a clandestine intercourse with a
stranger, she would never repeat the indiscretion.

But alas! poor Charlotte, she knew not the deceitfulness of her own
heart, or she would have avoided the trial of her stability.

Montraville was tender, eloquent, ardent, and yet respectful. “Shall I
not see you once more,” said he, “before I leave England? will you not
bless me by an assurance, that when we are divided by a vast expanse of
sea I shall not be forgotten?”

Charlotte sighed.

“Why that sigh, my dear Charlotte? could I flatter myself that a fear
for my safety, or a wish for my welfare occasioned it, how happy would
it make me.”

“I shall ever wish you well, Montraville,” said she; “but we must meet
no more.” “Oh say not so, my lovely girl: reflect, that when I leave my
native land, perhaps a few short weeks may terminate my existence; the
perils of the ocean--the dangers of war--”

“I can hear no more,” said Charlotte in a tremulous voice. “I must leave
you.”

“Say you will see me once again.”

“I dare not,” said she.

“Only for one half hour to-morrow evening: 'tis my last request. I shall
never trouble you again, Charlotte.”

“I know not what to say,” cried Charlotte, struggling to draw her hands
from him: “let me leave you now.”

“And you will come to-morrow,” said Montraville.

“Perhaps I may,” said she.

“Adieu then. I will live upon that hope till we meet again.”

He kissed her hand. She sighed an adieu, and catching hold of
Mademoiselle's arm, hastily entered the garden gate.




CHAPTER X.

WHEN WE HAVE EXCITED CURIOSITY, IT IS BUT AN ACT OF GOOD NATURE TO
GRATIFY IT.

MONTRAVILLE was the youngest son of a gentleman of fortune, whose
family being numerous, he was obliged to bring up his sons to genteel
professions, by the exercise of which they might hope to raise
themselves into notice.

“My daughters,” said he, “have been educated like gentlewomen; and
should I die before they are settled, they must have some provision
made, to place them above the snares and temptations which vice ever
holds out to the elegant, accomplished female, when oppressed by the
frowns of poverty and the sting of dependance: my boys, with only
moderate incomes, when placed in the church, at the bar, or in the
field, may exert their talents, make themselves friends, and raise their
fortunes on the basis of merit.”

When Montraville chose the profession of arms, his father presented him
with a commission, and made him a handsome provision for his private
purse. “Now, my boy,” said he, “go! seek glory in the field of battle.
You have received from me all I shall ever have it in my power to
bestow: it is certain I have interest to gain you promotion; but be
assured that interest shall never be exerted, unless by your future
conduct you deserve it. Remember, therefore, your success in life
depends entirely on yourself. There is one thing I think it my duty to
caution you against; the precipitancy with which young men frequently
rush into matrimonial engagements, and by their thoughtlessness draw
many a deserving woman into scenes of poverty and distress. A soldier
has no business to think of a wife till his rank is such as to place him
above the fear of bringing into the world a train of helpless innocents,
heirs only to penury and affliction. If, indeed, a woman, whose fortune
is sufficient to preserve you in that state of independence I would
teach you to prize, should generously bestow herself on a young soldier,
whose chief hope of future prosperity depended on his success in the
field--if such a woman should offer--every barrier is removed, and I
should rejoice in an union which would promise so much felicity. But
mark me, boy, if, on the contrary, you rush into a precipitate union
with a girl of little or no fortune, take the poor creature from a
comfortable home and kind friends, and plunge her into all the evils
a narrow income and increasing family can inflict, I will leave you to
enjoy the blessed fruits of your rashness; for by all that is sacred,
neither my interest or fortune shall ever be exerted in your favour. I
am serious,” continued he, “therefore imprint this conversation on your
memory, and let it influence your future conduct. Your happiness will
always be dear to me; and I wish to warn you of a rock on which the
peace of many an honest fellow has been wrecked; for believe me, the
difficulties and dangers of the longest winter campaign are much easier
to be borne, than the pangs that would seize your heart, when you beheld
the woman of your choice, the children of your affection, involved
in penury and distress, and reflected that it was your own folly and
precipitancy had been the prime cause of their sufferings.”

As this conversation passed but a few hours before Montraville took
leave of his father, it was deeply impressed on his mind: when,
therefore, Belcour came with him to the place of assignation with
Charlotte, he directed him to enquire of the French woman what were Miss
Temple's expectations in regard to fortune.

Mademoiselle informed him, that though Charlotte's father possessed a
genteel independence, it was by no means probable that he could give his
daughter more than a thousand pounds; and in case she did not marry to
his liking, it was possible he might not give her a single SOUS; nor
did it appear the least likely, that Mr. Temple would agree to her union
with a young man on the point of embarking for the feat of war.

Montraville therefore concluded it was impossible he should ever marry
Charlotte Temple; and what end he proposed to himself by continuing the
acquaintance he had commenced with her, he did not at that moment give
himself time to enquire.




CHAPTER XI.

CONFLICT OF LOVE AND DUTY.

ALMOST a week was now gone, and Charlotte continued every evening to
meet Montraville, and in her heart every meeting was resolved to be the
last; but alas! when Montraville at parting would earnestly intreat one
more interview, that treacherous heart betrayed her; and, forgetful
of its resolution, pleaded the cause of the enemy so powerfully, that
Charlotte was unable to resist. Another and another meeting succeeded;
and so well did Montraville improve each opportunity, that the heedless
girl at length confessed no idea could be so painful to her as that of
never seeing him again.

“Then we will never be parted,” said he.

“Ah, Montraville,” replied Charlotte, forcing a smile, “how can it be
avoided? My parents would never consent to our union; and even could
they be brought to approve it, how should I bear to be separated from my
kind, my beloved mother?”

“Then you love your parents more than you do me, Charlotte?”

“I hope I do,” said she, blushing and looking down, “I hope my affection
for them will ever keep me from infringing the laws of filial duty.”

“Well, Charlotte,” said Montraville gravely, and letting go her hand,
“since that is the case, I find I have deceived myself with fallacious
hopes. I had flattered my fond heart, that I was dearer to Charlotte
than any thing in the world beside. I thought that you would for my sake
have braved the dangers of the ocean, that you would, by your affection
and smiles, have softened the hardships of war, and, had it been my fate
to fall, that your tenderness would cheer the hour of death, and smooth
my passage to another world. But farewel, Charlotte! I see you never
loved me. I shall now welcome the friendly ball that deprives me of the
sense of my misery.”

“Oh stay, unkind Montraville,” cried she, catching hold of his arm, as
he pretended to leave her, “stay, and to calm your fears, I will here
protest that was it not for the fear of giving pain to the best of
parents, and returning their kindness with ingratitude, I would follow
you through every danger, and, in studying to promote your happiness,
insure my own. But I cannot break my mother's heart, Montraville; I must
not bring the grey hairs of my doating grand-father with sorrow to the
grave, or make my beloved father perhaps curse the hour that gave me
birth.” She covered her face with her hands, and burst into tears.

“All these distressing scenes, my dear Charlotte,” cried Montraville,
“are merely the chimeras of a disturbed fancy. Your parents might
perhaps grieve at first; but when they heard from your own hand that you
was with a man of honour, and that it was to insure your felicity by an
union with him, to which you feared they would never have given their
assent, that you left their protection, they will, be assured, forgive
an error which love alone occasioned, and when we return from America,
receive you with open arms and tears of joy.”

Belcour and Mademoiselle heard this last speech, and conceiving it
a proper time to throw in their advice and persuasions, approached
Charlotte, and so well seconded the entreaties of Montraville, that
finding Mademoiselle intended going with Belcour, and feeling her own
treacherous heart too much inclined to accompany them, the hapless
Charlotte, in an evil hour, consented that the next evening they should
bring a chaise to the end of the town, and that she would leave her
friends, and throw herself entirely on the protection of Montraville.
“But should you,” said she, looking earnestly at him, her eyes full
of tears, “should you, forgetful of your promises, and repenting the
engagements you here voluntarily enter into, forsake and leave me on a
foreign shore--” “Judge not so meanly of me,” said he. “The moment we
reach our place of destination, Hymen shall sanctify our love; and when
I shall forget your goodness, may heaven forget me.”

“Ah,” said Charlotte, leaning on Mademoiselle's arm as they walked up
the garden together, “I have forgot all that I ought to have remembered,
in consenting to this intended elopement.”

“You are a strange girl,” said Mademoiselle: “you never know your
own mind two minutes at a time. Just now you declared Montraville's
happiness was what you prized most in the world; and now I suppose
you repent having insured that happiness by agreeing to accompany him
abroad.”

“Indeed I do repent,” replied Charlotte, “from my soul: but while
discretion points out the impropriety of my conduct, inclination urges
me on to ruin.”

“Ruin! fiddlestick!” said Mademoiselle; “am I not going with you? and do
I feel any of these qualms?”

“You do not renounce a tender father and mother,” said Charlotte.

“But I hazard my dear reputation,” replied Mademoiselle, bridling.

“True,” replied Charlotte, “but you do not feel what I do.” She then
bade her good night: but sleep was a stranger to her eyes, and the tear
of anguish watered her pillow.




CHAPTER XII.

     Nature's last, best gift:
     Creature in whom excell'd, whatever could
     To sight or thought be nam'd!
     Holy, divine! good, amiable, and sweet!
     How thou art fall'n!--

WHEN Charlotte left her restless bed, her languid eye and pale cheek
discovered to Madame Du Pont the little repose she had tasted.

“My dear child,” said the affectionate governess, “what is the cause of
the languor so apparent in your frame? Are you not well?”

“Yes, my dear Madam, very well,” replied Charlotte, attempting to smile,
“but I know not how it was; I could not sleep last night, and my spirits
are depressed this morning.”

“Come cheer up, my love,” said the governess; “I believe I have brought
a cordial to revive them. I have just received a letter from your good
mama, and here is one for yourself.”

Charlotte hastily took the letter: it contained these words--

“As to-morrow is the anniversary of the happy day that gave my beloved
girl to the anxious wishes of a maternal heart, I have requested your
governess to let you come home and spend it with us; and as I know you
to be a good affectionate child, and make it your study to improve in
those branches of education which you know will give most pleasure to
your delighted parents, as a reward for your diligence and attention
I have prepared an agreeable surprise for your reception. Your
grand-father, eager to embrace the darling of his aged heart, will come
in the chaise for you; so hold yourself in readiness to attend him
by nine o'clock. Your dear father joins in every tender wish for your
health and future felicity, which warms the heart of my dear Charlotte's
affectionate mother, L. TEMPLE.”

“Gracious heaven!” cried Charlotte, forgetting where she was, and
raising her streaming eyes as in earnest supplication.

Madame Du Pont was surprised. “Why these tears, my love?” said she.
“Why this seeming agitation? I thought the letter would have rejoiced,
instead of distressing you.”

“It does rejoice me,” replied Charlotte, endeavouring at composure, “but
I was praying for merit to deserve the unremitted attentions of the best
of parents.”

“You do right,” said Madame Du Pont, “to ask the assistance of
heaven that you may continue to deserve their love. Continue, my dear
Charlotte, in the course you have ever pursued, and you will insure at
once their happiness and your own.”

“Oh!” cried Charlotte, as her governess left her, “I have forfeited both
for ever! Yet let me reflect:--the irrevocable step is not yet taken:
it is not too late to recede from the brink of a precipice, from which I
can only behold the dark abyss of ruin, shame, and remorse!”

She arose from her seat, and flew to the apartment of La Rue. “Oh
Mademoiselle!” said she, “I am snatched by a miracle from destruction!
This letter has saved me: it has opened my eyes to the folly I was
so near committing. I will not go, Mademoiselle; I will not wound the
hearts of those dear parents who make my happiness the whole study of
their lives.”

“Well,” said Mademoiselle, “do as you please, Miss; but pray understand
that my resolution is taken, and it is not in your power to alter it.
I shall meet the gentlemen at the appointed hour, and shall not be
surprized at any outrage which Montraville may commit, when he finds
himself disappointed. Indeed I should not be astonished, was he to come
immediately here, and reproach you for your instability in the hearing
of the whole school: and what will be the consequence? you will bear
the odium of having formed the resolution of eloping, and every girl
of spirit will laugh at your want of fortitude to put it in execution,
while prudes and fools will load you with reproach and contempt. You
will have lost the confidence of your parents, incurred their anger, and
the scoffs of the world; and what fruit do you expect to reap from this
piece of heroism, (for such no doubt you think it is?) you will have the
pleasure to reflect, that you have deceived the man who adores you,
and whom in your heart you prefer to all other men, and that you are
separated from him for ever.”

This eloquent harangue was given with such volubility, that Charlotte
could not find an opportunity to interrupt her, or to offer a single
word till the whole was finished, and then found her ideas so confused,
that she knew not what to say.

At length she determined that she would go with Mademoiselle to the
place of assignation, convince Montraville of the necessity of adhering
to the resolution of remaining behind; assure him of her affection, and
bid him adieu.

Charlotte formed this plan in her mind, and exulted in the certainty of
its success. “How shall I rejoice,” said she, “in this triumph of reason
over inclination, and, when in the arms of my affectionate parents, lift
up my soul in gratitude to heaven as I look back on the dangers I have
escaped!”

The hour of assignation arrived: Mademoiselle put what money and
valuables she possessed in her pocket, and advised Charlotte to do
the same; but she refused; “my resolution is fixed,” said she; “I will
sacrifice love to duty.”

Mademoiselle smiled internally; and they proceeded softly down the back
stairs and out of the garden gate. Montraville and Belcour were ready to
receive them.

“Now,” said Montraville, taking Charlotte in his arms, “you are mine for
ever.”

“No,” said she, withdrawing from his embrace, “I am come to take an
everlasting farewel.”

It would be useless to repeat the conversation that here ensued, suffice
it to say, that Montraville used every argument that had formerly been
successful, Charlotte's resolution began to waver, and he drew her
almost imperceptibly towards the chaise.

“I cannot go,” said she: “cease, dear Montraville, to persuade. I must
not: religion, duty, forbid.”

“Cruel Charlotte,” said he, “if you disappoint my ardent hopes, by
all that is sacred, this hand shall put a period to my existence. I
cannot--will not live without you.”

“Alas! my torn heart!” said Charlotte, “how shall I act?”

“Let me direct you,” said Montraville, lifting her into the chaise.

“Oh! my dear forsaken parents!” cried Charlotte.

The chaise drove off. She shrieked, and fainted into the arms of her
betrayer.




CHAPTER XIII.

CRUEL DISAPPOINTMENT.

“WHAT pleasure,” cried Mr. Eldridge, as he stepped into the chaise to go
for his grand-daughter, “what pleasure expands the heart of an old
man when he beholds the progeny of a beloved child growing up in every
virtue that adorned the minds of her parents. I foolishly thought, some
few years since, that every sense of joy was buried in the graves of my
dear partner and my son; but my Lucy, by her filial affection, soothed
my soul to peace, and this dear Charlotte has twined herself round my
heart, and opened such new scenes of delight to my view, that I almost
forget I have ever been unhappy.”

When the chaise stopped, he alighted with the alacrity of youth; so much
do the emotions of the soul influence the body.

It was half past eight o'clock; the ladies were assembled in the school
room, and Madame Du Pont was preparing to offer the morning sacrifice
of prayer and praise, when it was discovered, that Mademoiselle and
Charlotte were missing.

“She is busy, no doubt,” said the governess, “in preparing Charlotte for
her little excursion; but pleasure should never make us forget our duty
to our Creator. Go, one of you, and bid them both attend prayers.”

The lady who went to summon them, soon returned, and informed
the governess, that the room was locked, and that she had knocked
repeatedly, but obtained no answer.

“Good heaven!” cried Madame Du Pont, “this is very strange:” and turning
pale with terror, she went hastily to the door, and ordered it to be
forced open. The apartment instantly discovered, that no person had been
in it the preceding night, the beds appearing as though just made.
The house was instantly a scene of confusion: the garden, the pleasure
grounds were searched to no purpose, every apartment rang with the names
of Miss Temple and Mademoiselle; but they were too distant to hear; and
every face wore the marks of disappointment.

Mr. Eldridge was sitting in the parlour, eagerly expecting his
grand-daughter to descend, ready equipped for her journey: he heard
the confusion that reigned in the house; he heard the name of Charlotte
frequently repeated. “What can be the matter?” said he, rising and
opening the door: “I fear some accident has befallen my dear girl.”

The governess entered. The visible agitation of her countenance
discovered that something extraordinary had happened.

“Where is Charlotte?” said he, “Why does not my child come to welcome
her doating parent?”

“Be composed, my dear Sir,” said Madame Du Pont, “do not frighten
yourself unnecessarily. She is not in the house at present; but as
Mademoiselle is undoubtedly with her, she will speedily return
in safety; and I hope they will both be able to account for this
unseasonable absence in such a manner as shall remove our present
uneasiness.”

“Madam,” cried the old man, with an angry look, “has my child been
accustomed to go out without leave, with no other company or protector
than that French woman. Pardon me, Madam, I mean no reflections on your
country, but I never did like Mademoiselle La Rue; I think she was a
very improper person to be entrusted with the care of such a girl
as Charlotte Temple, or to be suffered to take her from under your
immediate protection.”

“You wrong me, Mr. Eldridge,” replied she, “if you suppose I have ever
permitted your grand-daughter to go out unless with the other ladies.
I would to heaven I could form any probable conjecture concerning her
absence this morning, but it is a mystery which her return can alone
unravel.” Servants were now dispatched to every place where there was
the least hope of hearing any tidings of the fugitives, but in vain.
Dreadful were the hours of horrid suspense which Mr. Eldridge passed
till twelve o'clock, when that suspense was reduced to a shocking
certainty, and every spark of hope which till then they had indulged,
was in a moment extinguished.

Mr. Eldridge was preparing, with a heavy heart, to return to his
anxiously-expecting children, when Madame Du Pont received the following
note without either name or date.

“Miss Temple is well, and wishes to relieve the anxiety of her
parents, by letting them know she has voluntarily put herself under
the protection of a man whose future study shall be to make her happy.
Pursuit is needless; the measures taken to avoid discovery are too
effectual to be eluded. When she thinks her friends are reconciled to
this precipitate step, they may perhaps be informed of her place of
residence. Mademoiselle is with her.”

As Madame Du Pont read these cruel lines, she turned pale as ashes, her
limbs trembled, and she was forced to call for a glass of water. She
loved Charlotte truly; and when she reflected on the innocence and
gentleness of her disposition, she concluded that it must have been
the advice and machinations of La Rue, which led her to this imprudent
action; she recollected her agitation at the receipt of her mother's
letter, and saw in it the conflict of her mind.

“Does that letter relate to Charlotte?” said Mr. Eldridge, having waited
some time in expectation of Madame Du Pont's speaking.

“It does,” said she. “Charlotte is well, but cannot return today.”

“Not return, Madam? where is she? who will detain her from her fond,
expecting parents?”

“You distract me with these questions, Mr. Eldridge. Indeed I know not
where she is, or who has seduced her from her duty.”

The whole truth now rushed at once upon Mr. Eldridge's mind. “She has
eloped then,” said he. “My child is betrayed; the darling, the comfort
of my aged heart, is lost. Oh would to heaven I had died but yesterday.”

A violent gush of grief in some measure relieved him, and, after several
vain attempts, he at length assumed sufficient composure to read the
note.

“And how shall I return to my children?” said he: “how approach that
mansion, so late the habitation of peace? Alas! my dear Lucy, how will
you support these heart-rending tidings? or how shall I be enabled to
console you, who need so much consolation myself?”

The old man returned to the chaise, but the light step and cheerful
countenance were no more; sorrow filled his heart, and guided his
motions; he seated himself in the chaise, his venerable head reclined
upon his bosom, his hands were folded, his eye fixed on vacancy, and
the large drops of sorrow rolled silently down his cheeks. There was a
mixture of anguish and resignation depicted in his countenance, as if he
would say, henceforth who shall dare to boast his happiness, or even
in idea contemplate his treasure, lest, in the very moment his heart is
exulting in its own felicity, the object which constitutes that felicity
should be torn from him.




CHAPTER XIV.

MATERNAL SORROW.

SLOW and heavy passed the time while the carriage was conveying Mr.
Eldridge home; and yet when he came in sight of the house, he wished a
longer reprieve from the dreadful task of informing Mr. and Mrs. Temple
of their daughter's elopement.

It is easy to judge the anxiety of these affectionate parents, when they
found the return of their father delayed so much beyond the expected
time. They were now met in the dining parlour, and several of the young
people who had been invited were already arrived. Each different part of
the company was employed in the same manner, looking out at the windows
which faced the road. At length the long-expected chaise appeared. Mrs.
Temple ran out to receive and welcome her darling: her young companions
flocked round the door, each one eager to give her joy on the return
of her birth-day. The door of the chaise was opened: Charlotte was not
there. “Where is my child?” cried Mrs. Temple, in breathless agitation.

Mr. Eldridge could not answer: he took hold of his daughter's hand and
led her into the house; and sinking on the first chair he came to, burst
into tears, and sobbed aloud.

“She is dead,” cried Mrs. Temple. “Oh my dear Charlotte!” and clasping
her hands in an agony of distress, fell into strong hysterics.

Mr. Temple, who had stood speechless with surprize and fear, now
ventured to enquire if indeed his Charlotte was no more. Mr. Eldridge
led him into another apartment; and putting the fatal note into
his hand, cried--“Bear it like a Christian,” and turned from him,
endeavouring to suppress his own too visible emotions.

It would be vain to attempt describing what Mr. Temple felt whilst he
hastily ran over the dreadful lines: when he had finished, the paper
dropt from his unnerved hand. “Gracious heaven!” said he, “could
Charlotte act thus?” Neither tear nor sigh escaped him; and he sat
the image of mute sorrow, till roused from his stupor by the repeated
shrieks of Mrs. Temple. He rose hastily, and rushing into the apartment
where she was, folded his arms about her, and saying--“Let us be
patient, my dear Lucy,” nature relieved his almost bursting heart by a
friendly gush of tears.

Should any one, presuming on his own philosophic temper, look with an
eye of contempt on the man who could indulge a woman's weakness, let him
remember that man was a father, and he will then pity the misery which
wrung those drops from a noble, generous heart.

Mrs. Temple beginning to be a little more composed, but still imagining
her child was dead, her husband, gently taking her hand, cried--“You are
mistaken, my love. Charlotte is not dead.”

“Then she is very ill, else why did she not come? But I will go to her:
the chaise is still at the door: let me go instantly to the dear girl.
If I was ill, she would fly to attend me, to alleviate my sufferings,
and cheer me with her love.”

“Be calm, my dearest Lucy, and I will tell you all,” said Mr. Temple.
“You must not go, indeed you must not; it will be of no use.”

“Temple,” said she, assuming a look of firmness and composure, “tell
me the truth I beseech you. I cannot bear this dreadful suspense. What
misfortune has befallen my child? Let me know the worst, and I will
endeavour to bear it as I ought.”

“Lucy,” replied Mr. Temple, “imagine your daughter alive, and in no
danger of death: what misfortune would you then dread?”

“There is one misfortune which is worse than death. But I know my child
too well to suspect--”

“Be not too confident, Lucy.”

“Oh heavens!” said she, “what horrid images do you start: is it possible
she should forget--”

“She has forgot us all, my love; she has preferred the love of a
stranger to the affectionate protection of her friends.

“Not eloped?” cried she eagerly.

Mr. Temple was silent.

“You cannot contradict it,” said she. “I see my fate in those tearful
eyes. Oh Charlotte! Charlotte! how ill have you requited our tenderness!
But, Father of Mercies,” continued she, sinking on her knees, and
raising her streaming eyes and clasped hands to heaven, “this once
vouchsafe to hear a fond, a distracted mother's prayer. Oh let thy
bounteous Providence watch over and protect the dear thoughtless girl,
save her from the miseries which I fear will be her portion, and oh!
of thine infinite mercy, make her not a mother, lest she should one day
feel what I now suffer.”

The last words faultered on her tongue, and she fell fainting into the
arms of her husband, who had involuntarily dropped on his knees beside
her.

A mother's anguish, when disappointed in her tenderest hopes, none but
a mother can conceive. Yet, my dear young readers, I would have you read
this scene with attention, and reflect that you may yourselves one day
be mothers. Oh my friends, as you value your eternal happiness, wound
not, by thoughtless ingratitude, the peace of the mother who bore you:
remember the tenderness, the care, the unremitting anxiety with which
she has attended to all your wants and wishes from earliest infancy to
the present day; behold the mild ray of affectionate applause that beams
from her eye on the performance of your duty: listen to her reproofs
with silent attention; they proceed from a heart anxious for your future
felicity: you must love her; nature, all-powerful nature, has planted
the seeds of filial affection in your bosoms.

Then once more read over the sorrows of poor Mrs. Temple, and remember,
the mother whom you so dearly love and venerate will feel the same, when
you, forgetful of the respect due to your maker and yourself, forsake
the paths of virtue for those of vice and folly.




CHAPTER XV.

EMBARKATION.

IT was with the utmost difficulty that the united efforts of
Mademoiselle and Montraville could support Charlotte's spirits during
their short ride from Chichester to Portsmouth, where a boat waited to
take them immediately on board the ship in which they were to embark for
America.

As soon as she became tolerably composed, she entreated pen and ink
to write to her parents. This she did in the most affecting, artless
manner, entreating their pardon and blessing, and describing
the dreadful situation of her mind, the conflict she suffered in
endeavouring to conquer this unfortunate attachment, and concluded
with saying, her only hope of future comfort consisted in the (perhaps
delusive) idea she indulged, of being once more folded in their
protecting arms, and hearing the words of peace and pardon from their
lips.

The tears streamed incessantly while she was writing, and she was
frequently obliged to lay down her pen: but when the task was completed,
and she had committed the letter to the care of Montraville to be sent
to the post office, she became more calm, and indulging the delightful
hope of soon receiving an answer that would seal her pardon, she in some
measure assumed her usual cheerfulness.

But Montraville knew too well the consequences that must unavoidably
ensue, should this letter reach Mr. Temple: he therefore wisely resolved
to walk on the deck, tear it in pieces, and commit the fragments to the
care of Neptune, who might or might not, as it suited his convenience,
convey them on shore.

All Charlotte's hopes and wishes were now concentred in one, namely that
the fleet might be detained at Spithead till she could receive a letter
from her friends: but in this she was disappointed, for the second
morning after she went on board, the signal was made, the fleet weighed
anchor, and in a few hours (the wind being favourable) they bid adieu to
the white cliffs of Al-bion.

In the mean time every enquiry that could be thought of was made by Mr.
and Mrs. Temple; for many days did they indulge the fond hope that she
was merely gone off to be married, and that when the indissoluble knot
was once tied, she would return with the partner she had chosen, and
entreat their blessing and forgiveness.

“And shall we not forgive her?” said Mr. Temple.

“Forgive her!” exclaimed the mother. “Oh yes, whatever be our errors,
is she not our child? and though bowed to the earth even with shame
and remorse, is it not our duty to raise the poor penitent, and whisper
peace and comfort to her desponding soul? would she but return, with
rapture would I fold her to my heart, and bury every remembrance of her
faults in the dear embrace.”

But still day after day passed on, and Charlotte did not appear,
nor were any tidings to be heard of her: yet each rising morning was
welcomed by some new hope--the evening brought with it disappointment.
At length hope was no more; despair usurped her place; and the mansion
which was once the mansion of peace, became the habitation of pale,
dejected melancholy.

The cheerful smile that was wont to adorn the face of Mrs. Temple was
fled, and had it not been for the support of unaffected piety, and a
consciousness of having ever set before her child the fairest example,
she must have sunk under this heavy affliction.

“Since,” said she, “the severest scrutiny cannot charge me with any
breach of duty to have deserved this severe chastisement, I will bow
before the power who inflicts it with humble resignation to his will;
nor shall the duty of a wife be totally absorbed in the feelings of the
mother; I will endeavour to appear more cheerful, and by appearing in
some measure to have conquered my own sorrow, alleviate the sufferings
of my husband, and rouse him from that torpor into which this misfortune
has plunged him. My father too demands my care and attention: I must
not, by a selfish indulgence of my own grief, forget the interest those
two dear objects take in my happiness or misery: I will wear a smile on
my face, though the thorn rankles in my heart; and if by so doing, I in
the smallest degree contribute to restore their peace of mind, I shall
be amply rewarded for the pain the concealment of my own feelings may
occasion.”

Thus argued this excellent woman: and in the execution of so laudable
a resolution we shall leave her, to follow the fortunes of the hapless
victim of imprudence and evil counsellors.




CHAPTER XVI.

NECESSARY DIGRESSION.

ON board of the ship in which Charlotte and Mademoiselle were embarked,
was an officer of large unincumbered fortune and elevated rank, and whom
I shall call Crayton.

He was one of those men, who, having travelled in their youth, pretend
to have contracted a peculiar fondness for every thing foreign, and to
hold in contempt the productions of their own country; and this affected
partiality extended even to the women.

With him therefore the blushing modesty and unaffected simplicity of
Charlotte passed unnoticed; but the forward pertness of La Rue, the
freedom of her conversation, the elegance of her person, mixed with a
certain engaging JE NE SAIS QUOI, perfectly enchanted him.

The reader no doubt has already developed the character of La Rue:
designing, artful, and selfish, she had accepted the devoirs of Belcour
because she was heartily weary of the retired life she led at the
school, wished to be released from what she deemed a slavery, and to
return to that vortex of folly and dissipation which had once plunged
her into the deepest misery; but her plan she flattered herself was now
better formed: she resolved to put herself under the protection of no
man till she had first secured a settlement; but the clandestine manner
in which she left Madame Du Pont's prevented her putting this plan
in execution, though Belcour solemnly protested he would make her a
handsome settlement the moment they arrived at Portsmouth. This he
afterwards contrived to evade by a pretended hurry of business; La Rue
readily conceiving he never meant to fulfil his promise, determined to
change her battery, and attack the heart of Colonel Crayton. She soon
discovered the partiality he entertained for her nation; and having
imposed on him a feigned tale of distress, representing Belcour as a
villain who had seduced her from her friends under promise of marriage,
and afterwards betrayed her, pretending great remorse for the errors she
had committed, and declaring whatever her affection for Belcour might
have been, it was now entirely extinguished, and she wished for nothing
more than an opportunity to leave a course of life which her soul
abhorred; but she had no friends to apply to, they had all renounced
her, and guilt and misery would undoubtedly be her future portion
through life.

Crayton was possessed of many amiable qualities, though the peculiar
trait in his character, which we have already mentioned, in a great
measure threw a shade over them. He was beloved for his humanity and
benevolence by all who knew him, but he was easy and unsuspicious
himself, and became a dupe to the artifice of others.

He was, when very young, united to an amiable Parisian lady, and perhaps
it was his affection for her that laid the foundation for the partiality
he ever retained for the whole nation. He had by her one daughter, who
entered into the world but a few hours before her mother left it. This
lady was universally beloved and admired, being endowed with all the
virtues of her mother, without the weakness of the father: she was
married to Major Beauchamp, and was at this time in the same fleet with
her father, attending her husband to New-York.

Crayton was melted by the affected contrition and distress of La Rue:
he would converse with her for hours, read to her, play cards with her,
listen to all her complaints, and promise to protect her to the utmost
of his power. La Rue easily saw his character; her sole aim was to
awaken a passion in his bosom that might turn out to her advantage,
and in this aim she was but too successful, for before the voyage was
finished, the infatuated Colonel gave her from under his hand a promise
of marriage on their arrival at New-York, under forfeiture of five
thousand pounds.

And how did our poor Charlotte pass her time during a tedious and
tempestuous passage? naturally delicate, the fatigue and sickness which
she endured rendered her so weak as to be almost entirely confined to
her bed: yet the kindness and attention of Montraville in some measure
contributed to alleviate her sufferings, and the hope of hearing from
her friends soon after her arrival, kept up her spirits, and cheered
many a gloomy hour.

But during the voyage a great revolution took place not only in the
fortune of La Rue but in the bosom of Belcour: whilst in pursuit of
his amour with Mademoiselle, he had attended little to the interesting,
inobtrusive charms of Charlotte, but when, cloyed by possession,
and disgusted with the art and dissimulation of one, he beheld the
simplicity and gentleness of the other, the contrast became too striking
not to fill him at once with surprise and admiration. He frequently
conversed with Charlotte; he found her sensible, well informed, but
diffident and unassuming. The languor which the fatigue of her body and
perturbation of her mind spread over her delicate features, served only
in his opinion to render her more lovely: he knew that Montraville did
not design to marry her, and he formed a resolution to endeavour to gain
her himself whenever Montraville should leave her.

Let not the reader imagine Belcour's designs were honourable. Alas! when
once a woman has forgot the respect due to herself, by yielding to the
solicitations of illicit love, they lose all their consequence, even in
the eyes of the man whose art has betrayed them, and for whose sake they
have sacrificed every valuable consideration.

     The heedless Fair, who stoops to guilty joys,
     A man may pity--but he must despise.

Nay, every libertine will think he has a right to insult her with his
licentious passion; and should the unhappy creature shrink from the
insolent overture, he will sneeringly taunt her with pretence of
modesty.




CHAPTER XVII.

A WEDDING.

ON the day before their arrival at New-York, after dinner, Crayton arose
from his seat, and placing himself by Mademoiselle, thus addressed the
company--

“As we are now nearly arrived at our destined port, I think it but my
duty to inform you, my friends, that this lady,” (taking her hand,) “has
placed herself under my protection. I have seen and severely felt the
anguish of her heart, and through every shade which cruelty or malice
may throw over her, can discover the most amiable qualities. I thought
it but necessary to mention my esteem for her before our disembarkation,
as it is my fixed resolution, the morning after we land, to give her
an undoubted title to my favour and protection by honourably uniting my
fate to hers. I would wish every gentleman here therefore to remember
that her honour henceforth is mine, and,” continued he, looking at
Belcour, “should any man presume to speak in the least disrespectfully
of her, I shall not hesitate to pronounce him a scoundrel.”

Belcour cast at him a smile of contempt, and bowing profoundly low,
wished Mademoiselle much joy in the proposed union; and assuring
the Colonel that he need not be in the least apprehensive of any one
throwing the least odium on the character of his lady, shook him by the
hand with ridiculous gravity, and left the cabin.

The truth was, he was glad to be rid of La Rue, and so he was but freed
from her, he cared not who fell a victim to her infamous arts.

The inexperienced Charlotte was astonished at what she heard. She
thought La Rue had, like herself, only been urged by the force of her
attachment to Belcour, to quit her friends, and follow him to the feat
of war: how wonderful then, that she should resolve to marry another
man. It was certainly extremely wrong. It was indelicate. She mentioned
her thoughts to Montraville. He laughed at her simplicity, called her a
little idiot, and patting her on the cheek, said she knew nothing of
the world. “If the world sanctifies such things, 'tis a very bad world I
think,” said Charlotte. “Why I always understood they were to have been
married when they arrived at New-York. I am sure Mademoiselle told me
Belcour promised to marry her.”

“Well, and suppose he did?”

“Why, he should be obliged to keep his word I think.”

“Well, but I suppose he has changed his mind,” said Montraville, “and
then you know the case is altered.”

Charlotte looked at him attentively for a moment. A full sense of her
own situation rushed upon her mind. She burst into tears, and remained
silent. Montraville too well understood the cause of her tears. He
kissed her cheek, and bidding her not make herself uneasy, unable to
bear the silent but keen remonstrance, hastily left her.

The next morning by sun-rise they found themselves at anchor before
the city of New-York. A boat was ordered to convey the ladies on shore.
Crayton accompanied them; and they were shewn to a house of public
entertainment. Scarcely were they seated when the door opened, and the
Colonel found himself in the arms of his daughter, who had landed a few
minutes before him. The first transport of meeting subsided, Crayton
introduced his daughter to Mademoiselle La Rue, as an old friend of her
mother's, (for the artful French woman had really made it appear to the
credulous Colonel that she was in the same convent with his first wife,
and, though much younger, had received many tokens of her esteem and
regard.)

“If, Mademoiselle,” said Mrs. Beauchamp, “you were the friend of
my mother, you must be worthy the esteem of all good hearts.”
 “Mademoiselle will soon honour our family,” said Crayton, “by supplying
the place that valuable woman filled: and as you are married, my dear, I
think you will not blame--”

“Hush, my dear Sir,” replied Mrs. Beauchamp: “I know my duty too well to
scrutinize your conduct. Be assured, my dear father, your happiness
is mine. I shall rejoice in it, and sincerely love the person who
contributes to it. But tell me,” continued she, turning to Charlotte,
“who is this lovely girl? Is she your sister, Mademoiselle?”

A blush, deep as the glow of the carnation, suffused the cheeks of
Charlotte.

“It is a young lady,” replied the Colonel, “who came in the same vessel
with us from England.' He then drew his daughter aside, and told her in
a whisper, Charlotte was the mistress of Montraville.

“What a pity!” said Mrs. Beauchamp softly, (casting a most compassionate
glance at her.) “But surely her mind is not depraved. The goodness of
her heart is depicted in her ingenuous countenance.”

Charlotte caught the word pity. “And am I already fallen so low?” said
she. A sigh escaped her, and a tear was ready to start, but Montraville
appeared, and she checked the rising emotion. Mademoiselle went with the
Colonel and his daughter to another apartment. Charlotte remained with
Montraville and Belcour. The next morning the Colonel performed his
promise, and La Rue became in due form Mrs. Crayton, exulted in her
own good fortune, and dared to look with an eye of contempt on the
unfortunate but far less guilty Charlotte.





VOLUME II




CHAPTER XVIII.

REFLECTIONS.

“AND am I indeed fallen so low,” said Charlotte, “as to be only pitied?
Will the voice of approbation no more meet my ear? and shall I never
again possess a friend, whose face will wear a smile of joy whenever I
approach? Alas! how thoughtless, how dreadfully imprudent have I been! I
know not which is most painful to endure, the sneer of contempt, or the
glance of compassion, which is depicted in the various countenances
of my own sex: they are both equally humiliating. Ah! my dear parents,
could you now see the child of your affections, the daughter whom you so
dearly loved, a poor solitary being, without society, here wearing out
her heavy hours in deep regret and anguish of heart, no kind friend of
her own sex to whom she can unbosom her griefs, no beloved mother, no
woman of character will appear in my company, and low as your Charlotte
is fallen, she cannot associate with infamy.”

These were the painful reflections which occupied the mind of Charlotte.
Montraville had placed her in a small house a few miles from New-York:
he gave her one female attendant, and supplied her with what money she
wanted; but business and pleasure so entirely occupied his time, that
he had little to devote to the woman, whom he had brought from all her
connections, and robbed of innocence. Sometimes, indeed, he would steal
out at the close of evening, and pass a few hours with her; and then so
much was she attached to him, that all her sorrows were forgotten while
blest with his society: she would enjoy a walk by moonlight, or sit
by him in a little arbour at the bottom of the garden, and play on the
harp, accompanying it with her plaintive, harmonious voice. But often,
very often, did he promise to renew his visits, and, forgetful of his
promise, leave her to mourn her disappointment. What painful hours
of expectation would she pass! She would sit at a window which looked
toward a field he used to cross, counting the minutes, and straining her
eyes to catch the first glimpse of his person, till blinded with tears
of disappointment, she would lean her head on her hands, and give free
vent to her sorrows: then catching at some new hope, she would again
renew her watchful position, till the shades of evening enveloped every
object in a dusky cloud: she would then renew her complaints, and, with
a heart bursting with disappointed love and wounded sensibility, retire
to a bed which remorse had strewed with thorns, and court in vain that
comforter of weary nature (who seldom visits the unhappy) to come and
steep her senses in oblivion.

Who can form an adequate idea of the sorrow that preyed upon the mind of
Charlotte? The wife, whose breast glows with affection to her husband,
and who in return meets only indifference, can but faintly conceive her
anguish. Dreadfully painful is the situation of such a woman, but she
has many comforts of which our poor Charlotte was deprived. The duteous,
faithful wife, though treated with indifference, has one solid pleasure
within her own bosom, she can reflect that she has not deserved
neglect--that she has ever fulfilled the duties of her station with the
strictest exactness; she may hope, by constant assiduity and unremitted
attention, to recall her wanderer, and be doubly happy in his returning
affection; she knows he cannot leave her to unite himself to another: he
cannot cast her out to poverty and contempt; she looks around her,
and sees the smile of friendly welcome, or the tear of affectionate
consolation, on the face of every person whom she favours with her
esteem; and from all these circumstances she gathers comfort: but the
poor girl by thoughtless passion led astray, who, in parting with
her honour, has forfeited the esteem of the very man to whom she has
sacrificed every thing dear and valuable in life, feels his indifference
in the fruit of her own folly, and laments her want of power to recall
his lost affection; she knows there is no tie but honour, and that, in
a man who has been guilty of seduction, is but very feeble: he may leave
her in a moment to shame and want; he may marry and forsake her for
ever; and should he, she has no redress, no friendly, soothing companion
to pour into her wounded mind the balm of consolation, no benevolent
hand to lead her back to the path of rectitude; she has disgraced her
friends, forfeited the good opinion of the world, and undone herself;
she feels herself a poor solitary being in the midst of surrounding
multitudes; shame bows her to the earth, remorse tears her distracted
mind, and guilt, poverty, and disease close the dreadful scene: she
sinks unnoticed to oblivion. The finger of contempt may point out to
some passing daughter of youthful mirth, the humble bed where lies this
frail sister of mortality; and will she, in the unbounded gaiety of her
heart, exult in her own unblemished fame, and triumph over the silent
ashes of the dead? Oh no! has she a heart of sensibility, she will stop,
and thus address the unhappy victim of folly--

“Thou had'st thy faults, but sure thy sufferings have expiated them:
thy errors brought thee to an early grave; but thou wert a
fellow-creature--thou hast been unhappy--then be those errors forgotten.”

Then, as she stoops to pluck the noxious weed from off the sod, a tear
will fall, and consecrate the spot to Charity.

For ever honoured be the sacred drop of humanity; the angel of mercy
shall record its source, and the soul from whence it sprang shall be
immortal.

My dear Madam, contract not your brow into a frown of disapprobation. I
mean not to extenuate the faults of those unhappy women who fall victims
to guilt and folly; but surely, when we reflect how many errors we are
ourselves subject to, how many secret faults lie hid in the recesses of
our hearts, which we should blush to have brought into open day (and yet
those faults require the lenity and pity of a benevolent judge, or
awful would be our prospect of futurity) I say, my dear Madam, when we
consider this, we surely may pity the faults of others.

Believe me, many an unfortunate female, who has once strayed into the
thorny paths of vice, would gladly return to virtue, was any generous
friend to endeavour to raise and re-assure her; but alas! it cannot be,
you say; the world would deride and scoff. Then let me tell you, Madam,
'tis a very unfeeling world, and does not deserve half the blessings
which a bountiful Providence showers upon it.

Oh, thou benevolent giver of all good! how shall we erring mortals
dare to look up to thy mercy in the great day of retribution, if we now
uncharitably refuse to overlook the errors, or alleviate the miseries,
of our fellow-creatures.




CHAPTER XIX.

A MISTAKE DISCOVERED.

JULIA Franklin was the only child of a man of large property, who, at
the age of eighteen, left her independent mistress of an unincumbered
income of seven hundred a year; she was a girl of a lively disposition,
and humane, susceptible heart: she resided in New-York with an uncle,
who loved her too well, and had too high an opinion of her prudence, to
scrutinize her actions so much as would have been necessary with many
young ladies, who were not blest with her discretion: she was, at the
time Montraville arrived at New-York, the life of society, and the
universal toast. Montraville was introduced to her by the following
accident.

One night when he was upon guard, a dreadful fire broke out near Mr.
Franklin's house, which, in a few hours, reduced that and several others
to ashes; fortunately no lives were lost, and, by the assiduity of the
soldiers, much valuable property was saved from the flames. In the midst
of the confusion an old gentleman came up to Montraville, and, putting
a small box into his hands, cried--“Keep it, my good Sir, till I come
to you again;” and then rushing again into the thickest of the
crowd, Montraville saw him no more. He waited till the fire was quite
extinguished and the mob dispersed; but in vain: the old gentleman did
not appear to claim his property; and Montraville, fearing to make any
enquiry, lest he should meet with impostors who might lay claim, without
any legal right, to the box, carried it to his lodgings, and locked it
up: he naturally imagined, that the person who committed it to his care
knew him, and would, in a day or two, reclaim it; but several weeks
passed on, and no enquiry being made, he began to be uneasy, and
resolved to examine the contents of the box, and if they were, as he
supposed, valuable, to spare no pains to discover, and restore them
to the owner. Upon opening it, he found it contained jewels to a large
amount, about two hundred pounds in money, and a miniature picture set
for a bracelet. On examining the picture, he thought he had somewhere
seen features very like it, but could not recollect where. A few
days after, being at a public assembly, he saw Miss Franklin, and the
likeness was too evident to be mistaken: he enquired among his brother
officers if any of them knew her, and found one who was upon terms of
intimacy in the family: “then introduce me to her immediately,” said
he, “for I am certain I can inform her of something which will give her
peculiar pleasure.”

He was immediately introduced, found she was the owner of the jewels,
and was invited to breakfast the next morning in order to their
restoration. This whole evening Montraville was honoured with Julia's
hand; the lively sallies of her wit, the elegance of her manner,
powerfully charmed him: he forgot Charlotte, and indulged himself in
saying every thing that was polite and tender to Julia. But on retiring,
recollection returned. “What am I about?” said he: “though I cannot
marry Charlotte, I cannot be villain enough to forsake her, nor must
I dare to trifle with the heart of Julia Franklin. I will return this
box,” said he, “which has been the source of so much uneasiness already,
and in the evening pay a visit to my poor melancholy Charlotte, and
endeavour to forget this fascinating Julia.”

He arose, dressed himself, and taking the picture out, “I will reserve
this from the rest,” said he, “and by presenting it to her when she
thinks it is lost, enhance the value of the obligation.” He repaired to
Mr. Franklin's, and found Julia in the breakfast parlour alone.

“How happy am I, Madam,” said he, “that being the fortunate instrument
of saving these jewels has been the means of procuring me the
acquaintance of so amiable a lady. There are the jewels and money all
safe.”

“But where is the picture, Sir?” said Julia.

“Here, Madam. I would not willingly part with it.”

“It is the portrait of my mother,” said she, taking it from him: “'tis
all that remains.” She pressed it to her lips, and a tear trembled in
her eyes. Montraville glanced his eye on her grey night gown and black
ribbon, and his own feelings prevented a reply.

Julia Franklin was the very reverse of Charlotte Temple: she was tall,
elegantly shaped, and possessed much of the air and manner of a woman
of fashion; her complexion was a clear brown, enlivened with the glow of
health, her eyes, full, black, and sparkling, darted their intelligent
glances through long silken lashes; her hair was shining brown, and her
features regular and striking; there was an air of innocent gaiety that
played about her countenance, where good humour sat triumphant.

“I have been mistaken,” said Montraville. “I imagined I loved Charlotte:
but alas! I am now too late convinced my attachment to her was merely
the impulse of the moment. I fear I have not only entailed lasting
misery on that poor girl, but also thrown a barrier in the way of my own
happiness, which it will be impossible to surmount. I feel I love Julia
Franklin with ardour and sincerity; yet, when in her presence, I am
sensible of my own inability to offer a heart worthy her acceptance, and
remain silent.” Full of these painful thoughts, Montraville walked out
to see Charlotte: she saw him approach, and ran out to meet him: she
banished from her countenance the air of discontent which ever appeared
when he was absent, and met him with a smile of joy.

“I thought you had forgot me, Montraville,” said she, “and was very
unhappy.”

“I shall never forget you, Charlotte,” he replied, pressing her hand.

The uncommon gravity of his countenance, and the brevity of his reply,
alarmed her.

“You are not well,” said she; “your hand is hot; your eyes are heavy;
you are very ill.”

“I am a villain,” said he mentally, as he turned from her to hide his
emotions.

“But come,” continued she tenderly, “you shall go to bed, and I will sit
by, and watch you; you will be better when you have slept.”

Montraville was glad to retire, and by pretending sleep, hide the
agitation of his mind from her penetrating eye. Charlotte watched by him
till a late hour, and then, lying softly down by his side, sunk into a
profound sleep, from whence she awoke not till late the next morning.




CHAPTER XX.

     Virtue never appears so amiable as when reaching forth
     her hand to raise a fallen sister.

CHAPTER OF ACCIDENTS.

WHEN Charlotte awoke, she missed Montraville; but thinking he might have
arisen early to enjoy the beauties of the morning, she was preparing
to follow him, when casting her eye on the table, she saw a note, and
opening it hastily, found these words--

“My dear Charlotte must not be surprised, if she does not see me again
for some time: unavoidable business will prevent me that pleasure: be
assured I am quite well this morning; and what your fond imagination
magnified into illness, was nothing more than fatigue, which a few hours
rest has entirely removed. Make yourself happy, and be certain of the
unalterable friendship of

“MONTRAVILLE.”


“FRIENDSHIP!” said Charlotte emphatically, as she finished the note, “is
it come to this at last? Alas! poor, forsaken Charlotte, thy doom is now
but too apparent. Montraville is no longer interested in thy happiness;
and shame, remorse, and disappointed love will henceforth be thy only
attendants.”

Though these were the ideas that involuntarily rushed upon the mind
of Charlotte as she perused the fatal note, yet after a few hours had
elapsed, the syren Hope again took possession of her bosom, and she
flattered herself she could, on a second perusal, discover an air of
tenderness in the few lines he had left, which at first had escaped her
notice.

“He certainly cannot be so base as to leave me,” said she, “and in
styling himself my friend does he not promise to protect me. I will not
torment myself with these causeless fears; I will place a confidence in
his honour; and sure he will not be so unjust as to abuse it.”

Just as she had by this manner of reasoning brought her mind to some
tolerable degree of composure, she was surprised by a visit from
Belcour. The dejection visible in Charlotte's countenance, her swoln
eyes and neglected attire, at once told him she was unhappy: he made no
doubt but Montraville had, by his coldness, alarmed her suspicions,
and was resolved, if possible, to rouse her to jealousy, urge her to
reproach him, and by that means occasion a breach between them. “If I
can once