The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Europeans
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Europeans

Author: Henry James


        
Release date: March 15, 2006 [eBook #179]
                Most recently updated: September 17, 2022

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/179

Credits: An Anonymous Volunteer


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE EUROPEANS ***




The Europeans

by Henry James


CONTENTS

 CHAPTER I
 CHAPTER II
 CHAPTER III
 CHAPTER IV
 CHAPTER V
 CHAPTER VI
 CHAPTER VII
 CHAPTER VIII
 CHAPTER IX
 CHAPTER X
 CHAPTER XI
 CHAPTER XII




CHAPTER I


A narrow grave-yard in the heart of a bustling, indifferent city, seen
from the windows of a gloomy-looking inn, is at no time an object of
enlivening suggestion; and the spectacle is not at its best when the
mouldy tombstones and funereal umbrage have received the ineffectual
refreshment of a dull, moist snow-fall. If, while the air is thickened
by this frosty drizzle, the calendar should happen to indicate that the
blessed vernal season is already six weeks old, it will be admitted
that no depressing influence is absent from the scene. This fact was
keenly felt on a certain 12th of May, upwards of thirty years since, by
a lady who stood looking out of one of the windows of the best hotel in
the ancient city of Boston. She had stood there for half an hour—stood
there, that is, at intervals; for from time to time she turned back
into the room and measured its length with a restless step. In the
chimney-place was a red-hot fire which emitted a small blue flame; and
in front of the fire, at a table, sat a young man who was busily plying
a pencil. He had a number of sheets of paper cut into small equal
squares, and he was apparently covering them with pictorial
designs—strange-looking figures. He worked rapidly and attentively,
sometimes threw back his head and held out his drawing at arm’s-length,
and kept up a soft, gay-sounding humming and whistling. The lady
brushed past him in her walk; her much-trimmed skirts were voluminous.
She never dropped her eyes upon his work; she only turned them,
occasionally, as she passed, to a mirror suspended above the
toilet-table on the other side of the room. Here she paused a moment,
gave a pinch to her waist with her two hands, or raised these
members—they were very plump and pretty—to the multifold braids of her
hair, with a movement half caressing, half corrective. An attentive
observer might have fancied that during these periods of desultory
self-inspection her face forgot its melancholy; but as soon as she
neared the window again it began to proclaim that she was a very
ill-pleased woman. And indeed, in what met her eyes there was little to
be pleased with. The window-panes were battered by the sleet; the
head-stones in the grave-yard beneath seemed to be holding themselves
askance to keep it out of their faces. A tall iron railing protected
them from the street, and on the other side of the railing an
assemblage of Bostonians were trampling about in the liquid snow. Many
of them were looking up and down; they appeared to be waiting for
something. From time to time a strange vehicle drew near to the place
where they stood,—such a vehicle as the lady at the window, in spite of
a considerable acquaintance with human inventions, had never seen
before: a huge, low omnibus, painted in brilliant colors, and decorated
apparently with jangling bells, attached to a species of groove in the
pavement, through which it was dragged, with a great deal of rumbling,
bouncing and scratching, by a couple of remarkably small horses. When
it reached a certain point the people in front of the grave-yard, of
whom much the greater number were women, carrying satchels and parcels,
projected themselves upon it in a compact body—a movement suggesting
the scramble for places in a life-boat at sea—and were engulfed in its
large interior. Then the life-boat—or the life-car, as the lady at the
window of the hotel vaguely designated it—went bumping and jingling
away upon its invisible wheels, with the helmsman (the man at the
wheel) guiding its course incongruously from the prow. This phenomenon
was repeated every three minutes, and the supply of eagerly-moving
women in cloaks, bearing reticules and bundles, renewed itself in the
most liberal manner. On the other side of the grave-yard was a row of
small red brick houses, showing a series of homely, domestic-looking
backs; at the end opposite the hotel a tall wooden church-spire,
painted white, rose high into the vagueness of the snow-flakes. The
lady at the window looked at it for some time; for reasons of her own
she thought it the ugliest thing she had ever seen. She hated it, she
despised it; it threw her into a state of irritation that was quite out
of proportion to any sensible motive. She had never known herself to
care so much about church-spires.

She was not pretty; but even when it expressed perplexed irritation her
face was most interesting and agreeable. Neither was she in her first
youth; yet, though slender, with a great deal of extremely
well-fashioned roundness of contour—a suggestion both of maturity and
flexibility—she carried her three and thirty years as a light-wristed
Hebe might have carried a brimming wine-cup. Her complexion was
fatigued, as the French say; her mouth was large, her lips too full,
her teeth uneven, her chin rather commonly modeled; she had a thick
nose, and when she smiled—she was constantly smiling—the lines beside
it rose too high, toward her eyes. But these eyes were charming: gray
in color, brilliant, quickly glancing, gently resting, full of
intelligence. Her forehead was very low—it was her only handsome
feature; and she had a great abundance of crisp dark hair, finely
frizzled, which was always braided in a manner that suggested some
Southern or Eastern, some remotely foreign, woman. She had a large
collection of ear-rings, and wore them in alternation; and they seemed
to give a point to her Oriental or exotic aspect. A compliment had once
been paid her, which, being repeated to her, gave her greater pleasure
than anything she had ever heard. “A pretty woman?” someone had said.
“Why, her features are very bad.” “I don’t know about her features,” a
very discerning observer had answered; “but she carries her head like a
pretty woman.” You may imagine whether, after this, she carried her
head less becomingly.

She turned away from the window at last, pressing her hands to her
eyes. “It’s too horrible!” she exclaimed. “I shall go back—I shall go
back!” And she flung herself into a chair before the fire.

“Wait a little, dear child,” said the young man softly, sketching away
at his little scraps of paper.

The lady put out her foot; it was very small, and there was an immense
rosette on her slipper. She fixed her eyes for a while on this
ornament, and then she looked at the glowing bed of anthracite coal in
the grate. “Did you ever see anything so hideous as that fire?” she
demanded. “Did you ever see anything so—so _affreux_ as—as everything?”
She spoke English with perfect purity; but she brought out this French
epithet in a manner that indicated that she was accustomed to using
French epithets.

“I think the fire is very pretty,” said the young man, glancing at it a
moment. “Those little blue tongues, dancing on top of the crimson
embers, are extremely picturesque. They are like a fire in an
alchemist’s laboratory.”

“You are too good-natured, my dear,” his companion declared.

The young man held out one of his drawings, with his head on one side.
His tongue was gently moving along his under-lip. “Good-natured—yes.
Too good-natured—no.”

“You are irritating,” said the lady, looking at her slipper.

He began to retouch his sketch. “I think you mean simply that you are
irritated.”

“Ah, for that, yes!” said his companion, with a little bitter laugh.
“It’s the darkest day of my life—and you know what that means.”

“Wait till tomorrow,” rejoined the young man.

“Yes, we have made a great mistake. If there is any doubt about it
today, there certainly will be none tomorrow. _Ce sera clair, au
moins!_”

The young man was silent a few moments, driving his pencil. Then at
last, “There are no such things as mistakes,” he affirmed.

“Very true—for those who are not clever enough to perceive them. Not to
recognize one’s mistakes—that would be happiness in life,” the lady
went on, still looking at her pretty foot.

“My dearest sister,” said the young man, always intent upon his
drawing, “it’s the first time you have told me I am not clever.”

“Well, by your own theory I can’t call it a mistake,” answered his
sister, pertinently enough.

The young man gave a clear, fresh laugh. “You, at least, are clever
enough, dearest sister,” he said.

“I was not so when I proposed this.”

“Was it you who proposed it?” asked her brother.

She turned her head and gave him a little stare. “Do you desire the
credit of it?”

“If you like, I will take the blame,” he said, looking up with a smile.

“Yes,” she rejoined in a moment, “you make no difference in these
things. You have no sense of property.”

The young man gave his joyous laugh again. “If that means I have no
property, you are right!”

“Don’t joke about your poverty,” said his sister. “That is quite as
vulgar as to boast about it.”

“My poverty! I have just finished a drawing that will bring me fifty
francs!”

_“Voyons,”_ said the lady, putting out her hand.

He added a touch or two, and then gave her his sketch. She looked at
it, but she went on with her idea of a moment before. “If a woman were
to ask you to marry her you would say, ‘Certainly, my dear, with
pleasure!’ And you would marry her and be ridiculously happy. Then at
the end of three months you would say to her, ‘You know that blissful
day when I begged you to be mine!’”

The young man had risen from the table, stretching his arms a little;
he walked to the window. “That is a description of a charming nature,”
he said.

“Oh, yes, you have a charming nature; I regard that as our capital. If
I had not been convinced of that I should never have taken the risk of
bringing you to this dreadful country.”

“This comical country, this delightful country!” exclaimed the young
man, and he broke into the most animated laughter.

“Is it those women scrambling into the omnibus?” asked his companion.
“What do you suppose is the attraction?”

“I suppose there is a very good-looking man inside,” said the young
man.

“In each of them? They come along in hundreds, and the men in this
country don’t seem at all handsome. As for the women—I have never seen
so many at once since I left the convent.”

“The women are very pretty,” her brother declared, “and the whole
affair is very amusing. I must make a sketch of it.” And he came back
to the table quickly, and picked up his utensils—a small
sketching-board, a sheet of paper, and three or four crayons. He took
his place at the window with these things, and stood there glancing
out, plying his pencil with an air of easy skill. While he worked he
wore a brilliant smile. Brilliant is indeed the word at this moment for
his strongly-lighted face. He was eight and twenty years old; he had a
short, slight, well-made figure. Though he bore a noticeable
resemblance to his sister, he was a better favored person: fair-haired,
clear-faced, witty-looking, with a delicate finish of feature and an
expression at once urbane and not at all serious, a warm blue eye, an
eyebrow finely drawn and excessively arched—an eyebrow which, if ladies
wrote sonnets to those of their lovers, might have been made the
subject of such a piece of verse—and a light moustache that flourished
upwards as if blown that way by the breath of a constant smile. There
was something in his physiognomy at once benevolent and picturesque.
But, as I have hinted, it was not at all serious. The young man’s face
was, in this respect, singular; it was not at all serious, and yet it
inspired the liveliest confidence.

“Be sure you put in plenty of snow,” said his sister. “_Bonté divine_,
what a climate!”

“I shall leave the sketch all white, and I shall put in the little
figures in black,” the young man answered, laughing. “And I shall call
it—what is that line in Keats?—Mid-May’s Eldest Child!”

“I don’t remember,” said the lady, “that mamma ever told me it was like
this.”

“Mamma never told you anything disagreeable. And it’s not like
this—every day. You will see that tomorrow we shall have a splendid
day.”

“_Qu’en savez-vous?_ Tomorrow I shall go away.”

“Where shall you go?”

“Anywhere away from here. Back to Silberstadt. I shall write to the
Reigning Prince.”

The young man turned a little and looked at her, with his crayon
poised. “My dear Eugenia,” he murmured, “were you so happy at sea?”

Eugenia got up; she still held in her hand the drawing her brother had
given her. It was a bold, expressive sketch of a group of miserable
people on the deck of a steamer, clinging together and clutching at
each other, while the vessel lurched downward, at a terrific angle,
into the hollow of a wave. It was extremely clever, and full of a sort
of tragi-comical power. Eugenia dropped her eyes upon it and made a sad
grimace. “How can you draw such odious scenes?” she asked. “I should
like to throw it into the fire!” And she tossed the paper away. Her
brother watched, quietly, to see where it went. It fluttered down to
the floor, where he let it lie. She came toward the window, pinching in
her waist. “Why don’t you reproach me—abuse me?” she asked. “I think I
should feel better then. Why don’t you tell me that you hate me for
bringing you here?”

“Because you would not believe it. I adore you, dear sister! I am
delighted to be here, and I am charmed with the prospect.”

“I don’t know what had taken possession of me. I had lost my head,”
Eugenia went on.

The young man, on his side, went on plying his pencil. “It is evidently
a most curious and interesting country. Here we are, and I mean to
enjoy it.”

His companion turned away with an impatient step, but presently came
back. “High spirits are doubtless an excellent thing,” she said; “but
you give one too much of them, and I can’t see that they have done you
any good.”

The young man stared, with lifted eyebrows, smiling; he tapped his
handsome nose with his pencil. “They have made me happy!”

“That was the least they could do; they have made you nothing else. You
have gone through life thanking fortune for such very small favors that
she has never put herself to any trouble for you.”

“She must have put herself to a little, I think, to present me with so
admirable a sister.”

“Be serious, Felix. You forget that I am your elder.”

“With a sister, then, so elderly!” rejoined Felix, laughing. “I hoped
we had left seriousness in Europe.”

“I fancy you will find it here. Remember that you are nearly thirty
years old, and that you are nothing but an obscure Bohemian—a penniless
correspondent of an illustrated newspaper.”

“Obscure as much as you please, but not so much of a Bohemian as you
think. And not at all penniless! I have a hundred pounds in my pocket.
I have an engagement to make fifty sketches, and I mean to paint the
portraits of all our cousins, and of all _their_ cousins, at a hundred
dollars a head.”

“You are not ambitious,” said Eugenia.

“You are, dear Baroness,” the young man replied.

The Baroness was silent a moment, looking out at the sleet-darkened
grave-yard and the bumping horse-cars. “Yes, I am ambitious,” she said
at last. “And my ambition has brought me to this dreadful place!” She
glanced about her—the room had a certain vulgar nudity; the bed and the
window were curtainless—and she gave a little passionate sigh. “Poor
old ambition!” she exclaimed. Then she flung herself down upon a sofa
which stood near against the wall, and covered her face with her hands.

Her brother went on with his drawing, rapidly and skillfully; after
some moments he sat down beside her and showed her his sketch. “Now,
don’t you think that’s pretty good for an obscure Bohemian?” he asked.
“I have knocked off another fifty francs.”

Eugenia glanced at the little picture as he laid it on her lap. “Yes,
it is very clever,” she said. And in a moment she added, “Do you
suppose our cousins do that?”

“Do what?”

“Get into those things, and look like that.”

Felix meditated awhile. “I really can’t say. It will be interesting to
discover.”

“Oh, the rich people can’t!” said the Baroness.

“Are you very sure they are rich?” asked Felix, lightly.

His sister slowly turned in her place, looking at him. “Heavenly
powers!” she murmured. “You have a way of bringing out things!”

“It will certainly be much pleasanter if they are rich,” Felix
declared.

“Do you suppose if I had not known they were rich I would ever have
come?”

The young man met his sister’s somewhat peremptory eye with his bright,
contented glance. “Yes, it certainly will be pleasanter,” he repeated.

“That is all I expect of them,” said the Baroness. “I don’t count upon
their being clever or friendly—at first—or elegant or interesting. But
I assure you I insist upon their being rich.”

Felix leaned his head upon the back of the sofa and looked awhile at
the oblong patch of sky to which the window served as frame. The snow
was ceasing; it seemed to him that the sky had begun to brighten. “I
count upon their being rich,” he said at last, “and powerful, and
clever, and friendly, and elegant, and interesting, and generally
delightful! _Tu vas voir_.” And he bent forward and kissed his sister.
“Look there!” he went on. “As a portent, even while I speak, the sky is
turning the color of gold; the day is going to be splendid.”

And indeed, within five minutes the weather had changed. The sun broke
out through the snow-clouds and jumped into the Baroness’s room.
“_Bonté divine_,” exclaimed this lady, “what a climate!”

“We will go out and see the world,” said Felix.

And after a while they went out. The air had grown warm as well as
brilliant; the sunshine had dried the pavements. They walked about the
streets at hazard, looking at the people and the houses, the shops and
the vehicles, the blazing blue sky and the muddy crossings, the
hurrying men and the slow-strolling maidens, the fresh red bricks and
the bright green trees, the extraordinary mixture of smartness and
shabbiness. From one hour to another the day had grown vernal; even in
the bustling streets there was an odor of earth and blossom. Felix was
immensely entertained. He had called it a comical country, and he went
about laughing at everything he saw. You would have said that American
civilization expressed itself to his sense in a tissue of capital
jokes. The jokes were certainly excellent, and the young man’s
merriment was joyous and genial. He possessed what is called the
pictorial sense; and this first glimpse of democratic manners stirred
the same sort of attention that he would have given to the movements of
a lively young person with a bright complexion. Such attention would
have been demonstrative and complimentary; and in the present case
Felix might have passed for an undispirited young exile revisiting the
haunts of his childhood. He kept looking at the violent blue of the
sky, at the scintillating air, at the scattered and multiplied patches
of color.

“_Comme c’est bariolé_, eh?” he said to his sister in that foreign
tongue which they both appeared to feel a mysterious prompting
occasionally to use.

“Yes, it is _bariolé_ indeed,” the Baroness answered. “I don’t like the
coloring; it hurts my eyes.”

“It shows how extremes meet,” the young man rejoined. “Instead of
coming to the West we seem to have gone to the East. The way the sky
touches the house-tops is just like Cairo; and the red and blue
sign-boards patched over the face of everything remind one of Mahometan
decorations.”

“The young women are not Mahometan,” said his companion. “They can’t be
said to hide their faces. I never saw anything so bold.”

“Thank Heaven they don’t hide their faces!” cried Felix. “Their faces
are uncommonly pretty.”

“Yes, their faces are often very pretty,” said the Baroness, who was a
very clever woman. She was too clever a woman not to be capable of a
great deal of just and fine observation. She clung more closely than
usual to her brother’s arm; she was not exhilarated, as he was; she
said very little, but she noted a great many things and made her
reflections. She was a little excited; she felt that she had indeed
come to a strange country, to make her fortune. Superficially, she was
conscious of a good deal of irritation and displeasure; the Baroness
was a very delicate and fastidious person. Of old, more than once, she
had gone, for entertainment’s sake and in brilliant company, to a fair
in a provincial town. It seemed to her now that she was at an enormous
fair—that the entertainment and the _désagréments_ were very much the
same. She found herself alternately smiling and shrinking; the show was
very curious, but it was probable, from moment to moment, that one
would be jostled. The Baroness had never seen so many people walking
about before; she had never been so mixed up with people she did not
know. But little by little she felt that this fair was a more serious
undertaking. She went with her brother into a large public garden,
which seemed very pretty, but where she was surprised at seeing no
carriages. The afternoon was drawing to a close; the coarse, vivid
grass and the slender tree-boles were gilded by the level
sunbeams—gilded as with gold that was fresh from the mine. It was the
hour at which ladies should come out for an airing and roll past a
hedge of pedestrians, holding their parasols askance. Here, however,
Eugenia observed no indications of this custom, the absence of which
was more anomalous as there was a charming avenue of remarkably
graceful, arching elms in the most convenient contiguity to a large,
cheerful street, in which, evidently, among the more prosperous members
of the _bourgeoisie_, a great deal of pedestrianism went forward. Our
friends passed out into this well lighted promenade, and Felix noticed
a great many more pretty girls and called his sister’s attention to
them. This latter measure, however, was superfluous; for the Baroness
had inspected, narrowly, these charming young ladies.

“I feel an intimate conviction that our cousins are like that,” said
Felix.

The Baroness hoped so, but this is not what she said. “They are very
pretty,” she said, “but they are mere little girls. Where are the
women—the women of thirty?”

“Of thirty-three, do you mean?” her brother was going to ask; for he
understood often both what she said and what she did not say. But he
only exclaimed upon the beauty of the sunset, while the Baroness, who
had come to seek her fortune, reflected that it would certainly be well
for her if the persons against whom she might need to measure herself
should all be mere little girls. The sunset was superb; they stopped to
look at it; Felix declared that he had never seen such a gorgeous
mixture of colors. The Baroness also thought it splendid; and she was
perhaps the more easily pleased from the fact that while she stood
there she was conscious of much admiring observation on the part of
various nice-looking people who passed that way, and to whom a
distinguished, strikingly-dressed woman with a foreign air, exclaiming
upon the beauties of nature on a Boston street corner in the French
tongue, could not be an object of indifference. Eugenia’s spirits rose.
She surrendered herself to a certain tranquil gaiety. If she had come
to seek her fortune, it seemed to her that her fortune would be easy to
find. There was a promise of it in the gorgeous purity of the western
sky; there was an intimation in the mild, unimpertinent gaze of the
passers of a certain natural facility in things.

“You will not go back to Silberstadt, eh?” asked Felix.

“Not tomorrow,” said the Baroness.

“Nor write to the Reigning Prince?”

“I shall write to him that they evidently know nothing about him over
here.”

“He will not believe you,” said the young man. “I advise you to let him
alone.”

Felix himself continued to be in high good humor. Brought up among
ancient customs and in picturesque cities, he yet found plenty of local
color in the little Puritan metropolis. That evening, after dinner, he
told his sister that he should go forth early on the morrow to look up
their cousins.

“You are very impatient,” said Eugenia.

“What can be more natural,” he asked, “after seeing all those pretty
girls today? If one’s cousins are of that pattern, the sooner one knows
them the better.”

“Perhaps they are not,” said Eugenia. “We ought to have brought some
letters—to some other people.”

“The other people would not be our kinsfolk.”

“Possibly they would be none the worse for that,” the Baroness replied.

Her brother looked at her with his eyebrows lifted. “That was not what
you said when you first proposed to me that we should come out here and
fraternize with our relatives. You said that it was the prompting of
natural affection; and when I suggested some reasons against it you
declared that the _voix du sang_ should go before everything.”

“You remember all that?” asked the Baroness.

“Vividly! I was greatly moved by it.”

She was walking up and down the room, as she had done in the morning;
she stopped in her walk and looked at her brother. She apparently was
going to say something, but she checked herself and resumed her walk.
Then, in a few moments, she said something different, which had the
effect of an explanation of the suppression of her earlier thought.
“You will never be anything but a child, dear brother.”

“One would suppose that you, madam,” answered Felix, laughing, “were a
thousand years old.”

“I am—sometimes,” said the Baroness.

“I will go, then, and announce to our cousins the arrival of a
personage so extraordinary. They will immediately come and pay you
their respects.”

Eugenia paced the length of the room again, and then she stopped before
her brother, laying her hand upon his arm. “They are not to come and
see me,” she said. “You are not to allow that. That is not the way I
shall meet them first.” And in answer to his interrogative glance she
went on. “You will go and examine, and report. You will come back and
tell me who they are and what they are; their number, gender, their
respective ages—all about them. Be sure you observe everything; be
ready to describe to me the locality, the accessories—how shall I say
it?—the _mise en scène_. Then, at my own time, at my own hour, under
circumstances of my own choosing, I will go to them. I will present
myself—I will appear before them!” said the Baroness, this time
phrasing her idea with a certain frankness.

“And what message am I to take to them?” asked Felix, who had a lively
faith in the justness of his sister’s arrangements.

She looked at him a moment—at his expression of agreeable veracity;
and, with that justness that he admired, she replied, “Say what you
please. Tell my story in the way that seems to you most—natural.” And
she bent her forehead for him to kiss.




CHAPTER II


The next day was splendid, as Felix had prophesied; if the winter had
suddenly leaped into spring, the spring had for the moment as quickly
leaped into summer. This was an observation made by a young girl who
came out of a large square house in the country, and strolled about in
the spacious garden which separated it from a muddy road. The flowering
shrubs and the neatly-disposed plants were basking in the abundant
light and warmth; the transparent shade of the great elms—they were
magnificent trees—seemed to thicken by the hour; and the intensely
habitual stillness offered a submissive medium to the sound of a
distant church-bell. The young girl listened to the church-bell; but
she was not dressed for church. She was bare-headed; she wore a white
muslin waist, with an embroidered border, and the skirt of her dress
was of colored muslin. She was a young lady of some two or three and
twenty years of age, and though a young person of her sex walking
bare-headed in a garden, of a Sunday morning in spring-time, can, in
the nature of things, never be a displeasing object, you would not have
pronounced this innocent Sabbath-breaker especially pretty. She was
tall and pale, thin and a little awkward; her hair was fair and
perfectly straight; her eyes were dark, and they had the singularity of
seeming at once dull and restless—differing herein, as you see, fatally
from the ideal “fine eyes,” which we always imagine to be both
brilliant and tranquil. The doors and windows of the large square house
were all wide open, to admit the purifying sunshine, which lay in
generous patches upon the floor of a wide, high, covered piazza
adjusted to two sides of the mansion—a piazza on which several
straw-bottomed rocking-chairs and half a dozen of those small
cylindrical stools in green and blue porcelain, which suggest an
affiliation between the residents and the Eastern trade, were
symmetrically disposed. It was an ancient house—ancient in the sense of
being eighty years old; it was built of wood, painted a clean, clear,
faded gray, and adorned along the front, at intervals, with flat wooden
pilasters, painted white. These pilasters appeared to support a kind of
classic pediment, which was decorated in the middle by a large triple
window in a boldly carved frame, and in each of its smaller angles by a
glazed circular aperture. A large white door, furnished with a
highly-polished brass knocker, presented itself to the rural-looking
road, with which it was connected by a spacious pathway, paved with
worn and cracked, but very clean, bricks. Behind it there were meadows
and orchards, a barn and a pond; and facing it, a short distance along
the road, on the opposite side, stood a smaller house, painted white,
with external shutters painted green, a little garden on one hand and
an orchard on the other. All this was shining in the morning air,
through which the simple details of the picture addressed themselves to
the eye as distinctly as the items of a “sum” in addition.

A second young lady presently came out of the house, across the piazza,
descended into the garden and approached the young girl of whom I have
spoken. This second young lady was also thin and pale; but she was
older than the other; she was shorter; she had dark, smooth hair. Her
eyes, unlike the other’s, were quick and bright; but they were not at
all restless. She wore a straw bonnet with white ribbons, and a long,
red, India scarf, which, on the front of her dress, reached to her
feet. In her hand she carried a little key.

“Gertrude,” she said, “are you very sure you had better not go to
church?”

Gertrude looked at her a moment, plucked a small sprig from a
lilac-bush, smelled it and threw it away. “I am not very sure of
anything!” she answered.

The other young lady looked straight past her, at the distant pond,
which lay shining between the long banks of fir trees. Then she said in
a very soft voice, “This is the key of the dining-room closet. I think
you had better have it, if anyone should want anything.”

“Who is there to want anything?” Gertrude demanded. “I shall be all
alone in the house.”

“Someone may come,” said her companion.

“Do you mean Mr. Brand?”

“Yes, Gertrude. He may like a piece of cake.”

“I don’t like men that are always eating cake!” Gertrude declared,
giving a pull at the lilac-bush.

Her companion glanced at her, and then looked down on the ground. “I
think father expected you would come to church,” she said. “What shall
I say to him?”

“Say I have a bad headache.”

“Would that be true?” asked the elder lady, looking straight at the
pond again.

“No, Charlotte,” said the younger one simply.

Charlotte transferred her quiet eyes to her companion’s face. “I am
afraid you are feeling restless.”

“I am feeling as I always feel,” Gertrude replied, in the same tone.

Charlotte turned away; but she stood there a moment. Presently she
looked down at the front of her dress. “Doesn’t it seem to you,
somehow, as if my scarf were too long?” she asked.

Gertrude walked half round her, looking at the scarf. “I don’t think
you wear it right,” she said.

“How should I wear it, dear?”

“I don’t know; differently from that. You should draw it differently
over your shoulders, round your elbows; you should look differently
behind.”

“How should I look?” Charlotte inquired.

“I don’t think I can tell you,” said Gertrude, plucking out the scarf a
little behind. “I could do it myself, but I don’t think I can explain
it.”

Charlotte, by a movement of her elbows, corrected the laxity that had
come from her companion’s touch. “Well, some day you must do it for me.
It doesn’t matter now. Indeed, I don’t think it matters,” she added,
“how one looks behind.”

“I should say it mattered more,” said Gertrude. “Then you don’t know
who may be observing you. You are not on your guard. You can’t try to
look pretty.”

Charlotte received this declaration with extreme gravity. “I don’t
think one should ever try to look pretty,” she rejoined, earnestly.

Her companion was silent. Then she said, “Well, perhaps it’s not of
much use.”

Charlotte looked at her a little, and then kissed her. “I hope you will
be better when we come back.”

“My dear sister, I am very well!” said Gertrude.

Charlotte went down the large brick walk to the garden gate; her
companion strolled slowly toward the house. At the gate Charlotte met a
young man, who was coming in—a tall, fair young man, wearing a high hat
and a pair of thread gloves. He was handsome, but rather too stout. He
had a pleasant smile. “Oh, Mr. Brand!” exclaimed the young lady.

“I came to see whether your sister was not going to church,” said the
young man.

“She says she is not going; but I am very glad you have come. I think
if you were to talk to her a little”.... And Charlotte lowered her
voice. “It seems as if she were restless.”

Mr. Brand smiled down on the young lady from his great height. “I shall
be very glad to talk to her. For that I should be willing to absent
myself from almost any occasion of worship, however attractive.”

“Well, I suppose you know,” said Charlotte, softly, as if positive
acceptance of this proposition might be dangerous. “But I am afraid I
shall be late.”

“I hope you will have a pleasant sermon,” said the young man.

“Oh, Mr. Gilman is always pleasant,” Charlotte answered. And she went
on her way.

Mr. Brand went into the garden, where Gertrude, hearing the gate close
behind him, turned and looked at him. For a moment she watched him
coming; then she turned away. But almost immediately she corrected this
movement, and stood still, facing him. He took off his hat and wiped
his forehead as he approached. Then he put on his hat again and held
out his hand. His hat being removed, you would have perceived that his
forehead was very large and smooth, and his hair abundant but rather
colorless. His nose was too large, and his mouth and eyes were too
small; but for all this he was, as I have said, a young man of striking
appearance. The expression of his little clean-colored blue eyes was
irresistibly gentle and serious; he looked, as the phrase is, as good
as gold. The young girl, standing in the garden path, glanced, as he
came up, at his thread gloves.

“I hoped you were going to church,” he said. “I wanted to walk with
you.”

“I am very much obliged to you,” Gertrude answered. “I am not going to
church.”

She had shaken hands with him; he held her hand a moment. “Have you any
special reason for not going?”

“Yes, Mr. Brand,” said the young girl.

“May I ask what it is?”

She looked at him smiling; and in her smile, as I have intimated, there
was a certain dullness. But mingled with this dullness was something
sweet and suggestive. “Because the sky is so blue!” she said.

He looked at the sky, which was magnificent, and then said, smiling
too, “I have heard of young ladies staying at home for bad weather, but
never for good. Your sister, whom I met at the gate, tells me you are
depressed,” he added.

“Depressed? I am never depressed.”

“Oh, surely, sometimes,” replied Mr. Brand, as if he thought this a
regrettable account of one’s self.

“I am never depressed,” Gertrude repeated. “But I am sometimes wicked.
When I am wicked I am in high spirits. I was wicked just now to my
sister.”

“What did you do to her?”

“I said things that puzzled her—on purpose.”

“Why did you do that, Miss Gertrude?” asked the young man.

She began to smile again. “Because the sky is so blue!”

“You say things that puzzle _me_,” Mr. Brand declared.

“I always know when I do it,” proceeded Gertrude. “But people puzzle me
more, I think. And they don’t seem to know!”

“This is very interesting,” Mr. Brand observed, smiling.

“You told me to tell you about my—my struggles,” the young girl went
on.

“Let us talk about them. I have so many things to say.”

Gertrude turned away a moment; and then, turning back, “You had better
go to church,” she said.

“You know,” the young man urged, “that I have always one thing to say.”

Gertrude looked at him a moment. “Please don’t say it now!”

“We are all alone,” he continued, taking off his hat; “all alone in
this beautiful Sunday stillness.”

Gertrude looked around her, at the breaking buds, the shining distance,
the blue sky to which she had referred as a pretext for her
irregularities. “That’s the reason,” she said, “why I don’t want you to
speak. Do me a favor; go to church.”

“May I speak when I come back?” asked Mr. Brand.

“If you are still disposed,” she answered.

“I don’t know whether you are wicked,” he said, “but you are certainly
puzzling.”

She had turned away; she raised her hands to her ears. He looked at her
a moment, and then he slowly walked to church.

She wandered for a while about the garden, vaguely and without purpose.
The church-bell had stopped ringing; the stillness was complete. This
young lady relished highly, on occasions, the sense of being alone—the
absence of the whole family and the emptiness of the house. Today,
apparently, the servants had also gone to church; there was never a
figure at the open windows; behind the house there was no stout negress
in a red turban, lowering the bucket into the great shingle-hooded
well. And the front door of the big, unguarded home stood open, with
the trustfulness of the golden age; or what is more to the purpose,
with that of New England’s silvery prime. Gertrude slowly passed
through it, and went from one of the empty rooms to the other—large,
clear-colored rooms, with white wainscots, ornamented with thin-legged
mahogany furniture, and, on the walls, with old-fashioned engravings,
chiefly of scriptural subjects, hung very high. This agreeable sense of
solitude, of having the house to herself, of which I have spoken,
always excited Gertrude’s imagination; she could not have told you why,
and neither can her humble historian. It always seemed to her that she
must do something particular—that she must honor the occasion; and
while she roamed about, wondering what she could do, the occasion
usually came to an end. Today she wondered more than ever. At last she
took down a book; there was no library in the house, but there were
books in all the rooms. None of them were forbidden books, and Gertrude
had not stopped at home for the sake of a chance to climb to the
inaccessible shelves. She possessed herself of a very obvious
volume—one of the series of the _Arabian Nights_—and she brought it out
into the portico and sat down with it in her lap. There, for a quarter
of an hour, she read the history of the loves of the Prince
Camaralzaman and the Princess Badoura. At last, looking up, she beheld,
as it seemed to her, the Prince Camaralzaman standing before her. A
beautiful young man was making her a very low bow—a magnificent bow,
such as she had never seen before. He appeared to have dropped from the
clouds; he was wonderfully handsome; he smiled—smiled as if he were
smiling on purpose. Extreme surprise, for a moment, kept Gertrude
sitting still; then she rose, without even keeping her finger in her
book. The young man, with his hat in his hand, still looked at her,
smiling and smiling. It was very strange.

“Will you kindly tell me,” said the mysterious visitor, at last,
“whether I have the honor of speaking to Miss Wentworth?”

“My name is Gertrude Wentworth,” murmured the young woman.

“Then—then—I have the honor—the pleasure—of being your cousin.”

The young man had so much the character of an apparition that this
announcement seemed to complete his unreality. “What cousin? Who are
you?” said Gertrude.

He stepped back a few paces and looked up at the house; then glanced
round him at the garden and the distant view. After this he burst out
laughing. “I see it must seem to you very strange,” he said. There was,
after all, something substantial in his laughter. Gertrude looked at
him from head to foot. Yes, he was remarkably handsome; but his smile
was almost a grimace. “It is very still,” he went on, coming nearer
again. And as she only looked at him, for reply, he added, “Are you all
alone?”

“Everyone has gone to church,” said Gertrude.

“I was afraid of that!” the young man exclaimed. “But I hope you are
not afraid of me.”

“You ought to tell me who you are,” Gertrude answered.

“I am afraid of you!” said the young man. “I had a different plan. I
expected the servant would take in my card, and that you would put your
heads together, before admitting me, and make out my identity.”

Gertrude had been wondering with a quick intensity which brought its
result; and the result seemed an answer—a wondrous, delightful
answer—to her vague wish that something would befall her. “I know—I
know,” she said. “You come from Europe.”

“We came two days ago. You have heard of us, then—you believe in us?”

“We have known, vaguely,” said Gertrude, “that we had relations in
France.”

“And have you ever wanted to see us?” asked the young man.

Gertrude was silent a moment. “I have wanted to see you.”

“I am glad, then, it is you I have found. We wanted to see you, so we
came.”

“On purpose?” asked Gertrude.

The young man looked round him, smiling still. “Well, yes; on purpose.
Does that sound as if we should bore you?” he added. “I don’t think we
shall—I really don’t think we shall. We are rather fond of wandering,
too; and we were glad of a pretext.”

“And you have just arrived?”

“In Boston, two days ago. At the inn I asked for Mr. Wentworth. He must
be your father. They found out for me where he lived; they seemed often
to have heard of him. I determined to come, without ceremony. So, this
lovely morning, they set my face in the right direction, and told me to
walk straight before me, out of town. I came on foot because I wanted
to see the country. I walked and walked, and here I am! It’s a good
many miles.”

“It is seven miles and a half,” said Gertrude, softly. Now that this
handsome young man was proving himself a reality she found herself
vaguely trembling; she was deeply excited. She had never in her life
spoken to a foreigner, and she had often thought it would be delightful
to do so. Here was one who had suddenly been engendered by the Sabbath
stillness for her private use; and such a brilliant, polite, smiling
one! She found time and means to compose herself, however: to remind
herself that she must exercise a sort of official hospitality. “We are
very—very glad to see you,” she said. “Won’t you come into the house?”
And she moved toward the open door.

“You are not afraid of me, then?” asked the young man again, with his
light laugh.

She wondered a moment, and then, “We are not afraid—here,” she said.

_“Ah, comme vous devez avoir raison!”_ cried the young man, looking all
round him, appreciatively. It was the first time that Gertrude had
heard so many words of French spoken. They gave her something of a
sensation. Her companion followed her, watching, with a certain
excitement of his own, this tall, interesting-looking girl, dressed in
her clear, crisp muslin. He paused in the hall, where there was a broad
white staircase with a white balustrade. “What a pleasant house!” he
said. “It’s lighter inside than it is out.”

“It’s pleasanter here,” said Gertrude, and she led the way into the
parlor,—a high, clean, rather empty-looking room. Here they stood
looking at each other,—the young man smiling more than ever; Gertrude,
very serious, trying to smile.

“I don’t believe you know my name,” he said. “I am called Felix Young.
Your father is my uncle. My mother was his half sister, and older than
he.”

“Yes,” said Gertrude, “and she turned Roman Catholic and married in
Europe.”

“I see you know,” said the young man. “She married and she died. Your
father’s family didn’t like her husband. They called him a foreigner;
but he was not. My poor father was born in Sicily, but his parents were
American.”

“In Sicily?” Gertrude murmured.

“It is true,” said Felix Young, “that they had spent their lives in
Europe. But they were very patriotic. And so are we.”

“And you are Sicilian,” said Gertrude.

“Sicilian, no! Let’s see. I was born at a little place—a dear little
place—in France. My sister was born at Vienna.”

“So you are French,” said Gertrude.

“Heaven forbid!” cried the young man. Gertrude’s eyes were fixed upon
him almost insistently. He began to laugh again. “I can easily be
French, if that will please you.”

“You are a foreigner of some sort,” said Gertrude.

“Of some sort—yes; I suppose so. But who can say of what sort? I don’t
think we have ever had occasion to settle the question. You know there
are people like that. About their country, their religion, their
profession, they can’t tell.”

Gertrude stood there gazing; she had not asked him to sit down. She had
never heard of people like that; she wanted to hear. “Where do you
live?” she asked.

“They can’t tell that, either!” said Felix. “I am afraid you will think
they are little better than vagabonds. I have lived
anywhere—everywhere. I really think I have lived in every city in
Europe.” Gertrude gave a little long soft exhalation. It made the young
man smile at her again; and his smile made her blush a little. To take
refuge from blushing she asked him if, after his long walk, he was not
hungry or thirsty. Her hand was in her pocket; she was fumbling with
the little key that her sister had given her. “Ah, my dear young lady,”
he said, clasping his hands a little, “if you could give me, in
charity, a glass of wine!”

Gertrude gave a smile and a little nod, and went quickly out of the
room. Presently she came back with a very large decanter in one hand
and a plate in the other, on which was placed a big, round cake with a
frosted top. Gertrude, in taking the cake from the closet, had had a
moment of acute consciousness that it composed the refection of which
her sister had thought that Mr. Brand would like to partake. Her
kinsman from across the seas was looking at the pale, high-hung
engravings. When she came in he turned and smiled at her, as if they
had been old friends meeting after a separation. “You wait upon me
yourself?” he asked. “I am served like the gods!” She had waited upon a
great many people, but none of them had ever told her that. The
observation added a certain lightness to the step with which she went
to a little table where there were some curious red glasses—glasses
covered with little gold sprigs, which Charlotte used to dust every
morning with her own hands. Gertrude thought the glasses very handsome,
and it was a pleasure to her to know that the wine was good; it was her
father’s famous madeira. Felix Young thought it excellent; he wondered
why he had been told that there was no wine in America. She cut him an
immense triangle out of the cake, and again she thought of Mr. Brand.
Felix sat there, with his glass in one hand and his huge morsel of cake
in the other—eating, drinking, smiling, talking. “I am very hungry,” he
said. “I am not at all tired; I am never tired. But I am very hungry.”

“You must stay to dinner,” said Gertrude. “At two o’clock. They will
all have come back from church; you will see the others.”

“Who are the others?” asked the young man. “Describe them all.”

“You will see for yourself. It is you that must tell me; now, about
your sister.”

“My sister is the Baroness Münster,” said Felix.

On hearing that his sister was a Baroness, Gertrude got up and walked
about slowly, in front of him. She was silent a moment. She was
thinking of it. “Why didn’t she come, too?” she asked.

“She did come; she is in Boston, at the hotel.”

“We will go and see her,” said Gertrude, looking at him.

“She begs you will not!” the young man replied. “She sends you her
love; she sent me to announce her. She will come and pay her respects
to your father.”

Gertrude felt herself trembling again. A Baroness Münster, who sent a
brilliant young man to “announce” her; who was coming, as the Queen of
Sheba came to Solomon, to pay her “respects” to quiet Mr.
Wentworth—such a personage presented herself to Gertrude’s vision with
a most effective unexpectedness. For a moment she hardly knew what to
say. “When will she come?” she asked at last.

“As soon as you will allow her—tomorrow. She is very impatient,”
answered Felix, who wished to be agreeable.

“Tomorrow, yes,” said Gertrude. She wished to ask more about her; but
she hardly knew what could be predicated of a Baroness Münster. “Is
she—is she—married?”

Felix had finished his cake and wine; he got up, fixing upon the young
girl his bright, expressive eyes. “She is married to a German
prince—Prince Adolf, of Silberstadt-Schreckenstein. He is not the
reigning prince; he is a younger brother.”

Gertrude gazed at her informant; her lips were slightly parted. “Is she
a—a _Princess_?” she asked at last.

“Oh, no,” said the young man; “her position is rather a singular one.
It’s a morganatic marriage.”

“Morganatic?” These were new names and new words to poor Gertrude.

“That’s what they call a marriage, you know, contracted between a scion
of a ruling house and—and a common mortal. They made Eugenia a
Baroness, poor woman; but that was all they could do. Now they want to
dissolve the marriage. Prince Adolf, between ourselves, is a ninny; but
his brother, who is a clever man, has plans for him. Eugenia, naturally
enough, makes difficulties; not, however, that I think she cares
much—she’s a very clever woman; I’m sure you’ll like her—but she wants
to bother them. Just now everything is _en l’air_.”

The cheerful, off-hand tone in which her visitor related this darkly
romantic tale seemed to Gertrude very strange; but it seemed also to
convey a certain flattery to herself, a recognition of her wisdom and
dignity. She felt a dozen impressions stirring within her, and
presently the one that was uppermost found words. “They want to
dissolve her marriage?” she asked.

“So it appears.”

“And against her will?”

“Against her right.”

“She must be very unhappy!” said Gertrude.

Her visitor looked at her, smiling; he raised his hand to the back of
his head and held it there a moment. “So she says,” he answered.
“That’s her story. She told me to tell it you.”

“Tell me more,” said Gertrude.

“No, I will leave that to her; she does it better.”

Gertrude gave her little excited sigh again. “Well, if she is unhappy,”
she said, “I am glad she has come to us.”

She had been so interested that she failed to notice the sound of a
footstep in the portico; and yet it was a footstep that she always
recognized. She heard it in the hall, and then she looked out of the
window. They were all coming back from church—her father, her sister
and brother, and their cousins, who always came to dinner on Sunday.
Mr. Brand had come in first; he was in advance of the others, because,
apparently, he was still disposed to say what she had not wished him to
say an hour before. He came into the parlor, looking for Gertrude. He
had two little books in his hand. On seeing Gertrude’s companion he
slowly stopped, looking at him.

“Is this a cousin?” asked Felix.

Then Gertrude saw that she must introduce him; but her ears, and, by
sympathy, her lips, were full of all that he had been telling her.
“This is the Prince,” she said, “the Prince of
Silberstadt-Schreckenstein!”

Felix burst out laughing, and Mr. Brand stood staring, while the
others, who had passed into the house, appeared behind him in the open
doorway.




CHAPTER III


That evening at dinner Felix Young gave his sister, the Baroness
Münster, an account of his impressions. She saw that he had come back
in the highest possible spirits; but this fact, to her own mind, was
not a reason for rejoicing. She had but a limited confidence in her
brother’s judgment; his capacity for taking rose-colored views was such
as to vulgarize one of the prettiest of tints. Still, she supposed he
could be trusted to give her the mere facts; and she invited him with
some eagerness to communicate them. “I suppose, at least, they didn’t
turn you out from the door;” she said. “You have been away some ten
hours.”

“Turn me from the door!” Felix exclaimed. “They took me to their
hearts; they killed the fatted calf.”

“I know what you want to say: they are a collection of angels.”

“Exactly,” said Felix. “They are a collection of angels—simply.”

“_C’est bien vague_,” remarked the Baroness. “What are they like?”

“Like nothing you ever saw.”

“I am sure I am much obliged; but that is hardly more definite.
Seriously, they were glad to see you?”

“Enchanted. It has been the proudest day of my life. Never, never have
I been so lionized! I assure you, I was cock of the walk. My dear
sister,” said the young man, “_nous n’avons qu’à nous tenir_; we shall
be great swells!”

Madame Münster looked at him, and her eye exhibited a slight responsive
spark. She touched her lips to a glass of wine, and then she said,
“Describe them. Give me a picture.”

Felix drained his own glass. “Well, it’s in the country, among the
meadows and woods; a wild sort of place, and yet not far from here.
Only, such a road, my dear! Imagine one of the Alpine glaciers
reproduced in mud. But you will not spend much time on it, for they
want you to come and stay, once for all.”

“Ah,” said the Baroness, “they want me to come and stay, once for all?
_Bon_.”

“It’s intensely rural, tremendously natural; and all overhung with this
strange white light, this far-away blue sky. There’s a big wooden
house—a kind of three-story bungalow; it looks like a magnified
Nuremberg toy. There was a gentleman there that made a speech to me
about it and called it a ‘venerable mansion;’ but it looks as if it had
been built last night.”

“Is it handsome—is it elegant?” asked the Baroness.

Felix looked at her a moment, smiling. “It’s very clean! No splendors,
no gilding, no troops of servants; rather straight-backed chairs. But
you might eat off the floors, and you can sit down on the stairs.”

“That must be a privilege. And the inhabitants are straight-backed too,
of course.”

“My dear sister,” said Felix, “the inhabitants are charming.”

“In what style?”

“In a style of their own. How shall I describe it? It’s primitive; it’s
patriarchal; it’s the _ton_ of the golden age.”

“And have they nothing golden but their _ton_? Are there no symptoms of
wealth?”

“I should say there was wealth without symptoms. A plain, homely way of
life: nothing for show, and very little for—what shall I call it?—for
the senses; but a great _aisance_, and a lot of money, out of sight,
that comes forward very quietly for subscriptions to institutions, for
repairing tenements, for paying doctor’s bills; perhaps even for
portioning daughters.”

“And the daughters?” Madame Münster demanded. “How many are there?”

“There are two, Charlotte and Gertrude.”

“Are they pretty?”

“One of them,” said Felix.

“Which is that?”

The young man was silent, looking at his sister. “Charlotte,” he said
at last.

She looked at him in return. “I see. You are in love with Gertrude.
They must be Puritans to their finger-tips; anything but gay!”

“No, they are not gay,” Felix admitted. “They are sober; they are even
severe. They are of a pensive cast; they take things hard. I think
there is something the matter with them; they have some melancholy
memory or some depressing expectation. It’s not the epicurean
temperament. My uncle, Mr. Wentworth, is a tremendously high-toned old
fellow; he looks as if he were undergoing martyrdom, not by fire, but
by freezing. But we shall cheer them up; we shall do them good. They
will take a good deal of stirring up; but they are wonderfully kind and
gentle. And they are appreciative. They think one clever; they think
one remarkable!”

“That is very fine, so far as it goes,” said the Baroness. “But are we
to be shut up to these three people, Mr. Wentworth and the two young
women—what did you say their names were—Deborah and Hephzibah?”

“Oh, no; there is another little girl, a cousin of theirs, a very
pretty creature; a thorough little American. And then there is the son
of the house.”

“Good!” said the Baroness. “We are coming to the gentlemen. What of the
son of the house?”

“I am afraid he gets tipsy.”

“He, then, has the epicurean temperament! How old is he?”

“He is a boy of twenty; a pretty young fellow, but I am afraid he has
vulgar tastes. And then there is Mr. Brand—a very tall young man, a
sort of lay-priest. They seem to think a good deal of him, but I don’t
exactly make him out.”

“And is there nothing,” asked the Baroness, “between these
extremes—this mysterious ecclesiastic and that intemperate youth?”

“Oh, yes, there is Mr. Acton. I think,” said the young man, with a nod
at his sister, “that you will like Mr. Acton.”

“Remember that I am very fastidious,” said the Baroness. “Has he very
good manners?”

“He will have them with you. He is a man of the world; he has been to
China.”

Madame Münster gave a little laugh. “A man of the Chinese world! He
must be very interesting.”

“I have an idea that he brought home a fortune,” said Felix.

“That is always interesting. Is he young, good-looking, clever?”

“He is less than forty; he has a baldish head; he says witty things. I
rather think,” added the young man, “that he will admire the Baroness
Münster.”

“It is very possible,” said this lady. Her brother never knew how she
would take things; but shortly afterwards she declared that he had made
a very pretty description and that on the morrow she would go and see
for herself.

They mounted, accordingly, into a great barouche—a vehicle as to which
the Baroness found nothing to criticise but the price that was asked
for it and the fact that the coachman wore a straw hat. (At Silberstadt
Madame Münster had had liveries of yellow and crimson.) They drove into
the country, and the Baroness, leaning far back and swaying her
lace-fringed parasol, looked to right and to left and surveyed the
way-side objects. After a while she pronounced them _affreux_. Her
brother remarked that it was apparently a country in which the
foreground was inferior to the _plans reculés_; and the Baroness
rejoined that the landscape seemed to be all foreground. Felix had
fixed with his new friends the hour at which he should bring his
sister; it was four o’clock in the afternoon. The large, clean-faced
house wore, to his eyes, as the barouche drove up to it, a very
friendly aspect; the high, slender elms made lengthening shadows in
front of it. The Baroness descended; her American kinsfolk were
stationed in the portico. Felix waved his hat to them, and a tall, lean
gentleman, with a high forehead and a clean shaven face, came forward
toward the garden gate. Charlotte Wentworth walked at his side.
Gertrude came behind, more slowly. Both of these young ladies wore
rustling silk dresses. Felix ushered his sister into the gate. “Be very
gracious,” he said to her. But he saw the admonition was superfluous.
Eugenia was prepared to be gracious as only Eugenia could be. Felix
knew no keener pleasure than to be able to admire his sister
unrestrictedly; for if the opportunity was frequent, it was not
inveterate. When she desired to please she was to him, as to everyone
else, the most charming woman in the world. Then he forgot that she was
ever anything else; that she was sometimes hard and perverse; that he
was occasionally afraid of her. Now, as she took his arm to pass into
the garden, he felt that she desired, that she proposed, to please, and
this situation made him very happy. Eugenia would please.

The tall gentleman came to meet her, looking very rigid and grave. But
it was a rigidity that had no illiberal meaning. Mr. Wentworth’s manner
was pregnant, on the contrary, with a sense of grand responsibility, of
the solemnity of the occasion, of its being difficult to show
sufficient deference to a lady at once so distinguished and so unhappy.
Felix had observed on the day before his characteristic pallor; and now
he perceived that there was something almost cadaverous in his uncle’s
high-featured white face. But so clever were this young man’s quick
sympathies and perceptions that he already learned that in these
semi-mortuary manifestations there was no cause for alarm. His light
imagination had gained a glimpse of Mr. Wentworth’s spiritual
mechanism, and taught him that, the old man being infinitely
conscientious, the special operation of conscience within him announced
itself by several of the indications of physical faintness.

The Baroness took her uncle’s hand, and stood looking at him with her
ugly face and her beautiful smile. “Have I done right to come?” she
asked.

“Very right, very right,” said Mr. Wentworth, solemnly. He had arranged
in his mind a little speech; but now it quite faded away. He felt
almost frightened. He had never been looked at in just that way—with
just that fixed, intense smile—by any woman; and it perplexed and
weighed upon him, now, that the woman who was smiling so and who had
instantly given him a vivid sense of her possessing other unprecedented
attributes, was his own niece, the child of his own father’s daughter.
The idea that his niece should be a German Baroness, married
“morganatically” to a Prince, had already given him much to think
about. Was it right, was it just, was it acceptable? He always slept
badly, and the night before he had lain awake much more even than
usual, asking himself these questions. The strange word “morganatic”
was constantly in his ears; it reminded him of a certain Mrs. Morgan
whom he had once known and who had been a bold, unpleasant woman. He
had a feeling that it was his duty, so long as the Baroness looked at
him, smiling in that way, to meet her glance with his own scrupulously
adjusted, consciously frigid organs of vision; but on this occasion he
failed to perform his duty to the last. He looked away toward his
daughters. “We are very glad to see you,” he had said. “Allow me to
introduce my daughters—Miss Charlotte Wentworth, Miss Gertrude
Wentworth.”

The Baroness thought she had never seen people less demonstrative. But
Charlotte kissed her and took her hand, looking at her sweetly and
solemnly. Gertrude seemed to her almost funereal, though Gertrude might
have found a source of gaiety in the fact that Felix, with his
magnificent smile, had been talking to her; he had greeted her as a
very old friend. When she kissed the Baroness she had tears in her
eyes. Madame Münster took each of these young women by the hand, and
looked at them all over. Charlotte thought her very strange-looking and
singularly dressed; she could not have said whether it was well or ill.
She was glad, at any rate, that they had put on their silk
gowns—especially Gertrude. “My cousins are very pretty,” said the
Baroness, turning her eyes from one to the other. “Your daughters are
very handsome, sir.”

Charlotte blushed quickly; she had never yet heard her personal
appearance alluded to in a loud, expressive voice. Gertrude looked
away—not at Felix; she was extremely pleased. It was not the compliment
that pleased her; she did not believe it; she thought herself very
plain. She could hardly have told you the source of her satisfaction;
it came from something in the way the Baroness spoke, and it was not
diminished—it was rather deepened, oddly enough—by the young girl’s
disbelief. Mr. Wentworth was silent; and then he asked, formally,
“Won’t you come into the house?”

“These are not all; you have some other children,” said the Baroness.

“I have a son,” Mr. Wentworth answered.

“And why doesn’t he come to meet me?” Eugenia cried. “I am afraid he is
not so charming as his sisters.”

“I don’t know; I will see about it,” the old man declared.

“He is rather afraid of ladies,” Charlotte said, softly.

“He is very handsome,” said Gertrude, as loud as she could.

“We will go in and find him. We will draw him out of his _cachette_.”
And the Baroness took Mr. Wentworth’s arm, who was not aware that he
had offered it to her, and who, as they walked toward the house,
wondered whether he ought to have offered it and whether it was proper
for her to take it if it had not been offered. “I want to know you
well,” said the Baroness, interrupting these meditations, “and I want
you to know me.”

“It seems natural that we should know each other,” Mr. Wentworth
rejoined. “We are near relatives.”

“Ah, there comes a moment in life when one reverts, irresistibly, to
one’s natural ties—to one’s natural affections. You must have found
that!” said Eugenia.

Mr. Wentworth had been told the day before by Felix that Eugenia was
very clever, very brilliant, and the information had held him in some
suspense. This was the cleverness, he supposed; the brilliancy was
beginning. “Yes, the natural affections are very strong,” he murmured.

“In some people,” the Baroness declared. “Not in all.” Charlotte was
walking beside her; she took hold of her hand again, smiling always.
“And you, _cousine_, where did you get that enchanting complexion?” she
went on; “such lilies and roses?” The roses in poor Charlotte’s
countenance began speedily to predominate over the lilies, and she
quickened her step and reached the portico. “This is the country of
complexions,” the Baroness continued, addressing herself to Mr.
Wentworth. “I am convinced they are more delicate. There are very good
ones in England—in Holland; but they are very apt to be coarse. There
is too much red.”

“I think you will find,” said Mr. Wentworth, “that this country is
superior in many respects to those you mention. I have been to England
and Holland.”

“Ah, you have been to Europe?” cried the Baroness. “Why didn’t you come
and see me? But it’s better, after all, this way,” she said. They were
entering the house; she paused and looked round her. “I see you have
arranged your house—your beautiful house—in the—in the Dutch taste!”

“The house is very old,” remarked Mr. Wentworth. “General Washington
once spent a week here.”

“Oh, I have heard of Washington,” cried the Baroness. “My father used
to tell me of him.”

Mr. Wentworth was silent a moment, and then, “I found he was very well
known in Europe,” he said.

Felix had lingered in the garden with Gertrude; he was standing before
her and smiling, as he had done the day before. What had happened the
day before seemed to her a kind of dream. He had been there and he had
changed everything; the others had seen him, they had talked with him;
but that he should come again, that he should be part of the future,
part of her small, familiar, much-meditating life—this needed, afresh,
the evidence of her senses. The evidence had come to her senses now;
and her senses seemed to rejoice in it. “What do you think of Eugenia?”
Felix asked. “Isn’t she charming?”

“She is very brilliant,” said Gertrude. “But I can’t tell yet. She
seems to me like a singer singing an air. You can’t tell till the song
is done.”

“Ah, the song will never be done!” exclaimed the young man, laughing.
“Don’t you think her handsome?”

Gertrude had been disappointed in the beauty of the Baroness Münster;
she had expected her, for mysterious reasons, to resemble a very pretty
portrait of the Empress Josephine, of which there hung an engraving in
one of the parlors, and which the younger Miss Wentworth had always
greatly admired. But the Baroness was not at all like that—not at all.
Though different, however, she was very wonderful, and Gertrude felt
herself most suggestively corrected. It was strange, nevertheless, that
Felix should speak in that positive way about his sister’s beauty. “I
think I _shall_ think her handsome,” Gertrude said. “It must be very
interesting to know her. I don’t feel as if I ever could.”

“Ah, you will know her well; you will become great friends,” Felix
declared, as if this were the easiest thing in the world.

“She is very graceful,” said Gertrude, looking after the Baroness,
suspended to her father’s arm. It was a pleasure to her to say that
anyone was graceful.

Felix had been looking about him. “And your little cousin, of
yesterday,” he said, “who was so wonderfully pretty—what has become of
her?”

“She is in the parlor,” Gertrude answered. “Yes, she is very pretty.”
She felt as if it were her duty to take him straight into the house, to
where he might be near her cousin. But after hesitating a moment she
lingered still. “I didn’t believe you would come back,” she said.

“Not come back!” cried Felix, laughing. “You didn’t know, then, the
impression made upon this susceptible heart of mine.”

She wondered whether he meant the impression her cousin Lizzie had
made. “Well,” she said, “I didn’t think we should ever see you again.”

“And pray what did you think would become of me?”

“I don’t know. I thought you would melt away.”

“That’s a compliment to my solidity! I melt very often,” said Felix,
“but there is always something left of me.”

“I came and waited for you by the door, because the others did,”
Gertrude went on. “But if you had never appeared I should not have been
surprised.”

“I hope,” declared Felix, looking at her, “that you would have been
disappointed.”

She looked at him a little, and shook her head. “No—no!”

_“Ah, par exemple!”_ cried the young man. “You deserve that I should
never leave you.”

Going into the parlor they found Mr. Wentworth performing
introductions. A young man was standing before the Baroness, blushing a
good deal, laughing a little, and shifting his weight from one foot to
the other—a slim, mild-faced young man, with neatly-arranged features,
like those of Mr. Wentworth. Two other gentlemen, behind him, had risen
from their seats, and a little apart, near one of the windows, stood a
remarkably pretty young girl. The young girl was knitting a stocking;
but, while her fingers quickly moved, she looked with wide, brilliant
eyes at the Baroness.

“And what is your son’s name?” said Eugenia, smiling at the young man.

“My name is Clifford Wentworth, ma’am,” he said in a tremulous voice.

“Why didn’t you come out to meet me, Mr. Clifford Wentworth?” the
Baroness demanded, with her beautiful smile.

“I didn’t think you would want me,” said the young man, slowly sidling
about.

“One always wants a _beau cousin_,—if one has one! But if you are very
nice to me in future I won’t remember it against you.” And Madame
Münster transferred her smile to the other persons present. It rested
first upon the candid countenance and long-skirted figure of Mr. Brand,
whose eyes were intently fixed upon Mr. Wentworth, as if to beg him not
to prolong an anomalous situation. Mr. Wentworth pronounced his name.
Eugenia gave him a very charming glance, and then looked at the other
gentleman.

This latter personage was a man of rather less than the usual stature
and the usual weight, with a quick, observant, agreeable dark eye, a
small quantity of thin dark hair, and a small moustache. He had been
standing with his hands in his pockets; and when Eugenia looked at him
he took them out. But he did not, like Mr. Brand, look evasively and
urgently at their host. He met Eugenia’s eyes; he appeared to
appreciate the privilege of meeting them. Madame Münster instantly felt
that he was, intrinsically, the most important person present. She was
not unconscious that this impression was in some degree manifested in
the little sympathetic nod with which she acknowledged Mr. Wentworth’s
announcement, “My cousin, Mr. Acton!”

“Your cousin—not mine?” said the Baroness.

“It only depends upon you,” Mr. Acton declared, laughing.

The Baroness looked at him a moment, and noticed that he had very white
teeth. “Let it depend upon your behavior,” she said. “I think I had
better wait. I have cousins enough. Unless I can also claim
relationship,” she added, “with that charming young lady,” and she
pointed to the young girl at the window.

“That’s my sister,” said Mr. Acton. And Gertrude Wentworth put her arm
round the young girl and led her forward. It was not, apparently, that
she needed much leading. She came toward the Baroness with a light,
quick step, and with perfect self-possession, rolling her stocking
round its needles. She had dark blue eyes and dark brown hair; she was
wonderfully pretty.

Eugenia kissed her, as she had kissed the other young women, and then
held her off a little, looking at her. “Now this is quite another
_type_,” she said; she pronounced the word in the French manner. “This
is a different outline, my uncle, a different character, from that of
your own daughters. This, Felix,” she went on, “is very much more what
we have always thought of as the American type.”

The young girl, during this exposition, was smiling askance at everyone
in turn, and at Felix out of turn. “I find only one type here!” cried
Felix, laughing. “The type adorable!”

This sally was received in perfect silence, but Felix, who learned all
things quickly, had already learned that the silences frequently
observed among his new acquaintances were not necessarily restrictive
or resentful. It was, as one might say, the silence of expectation, of
modesty. They were all standing round his sister, as if they were
expecting her to acquit herself of the exhibition of some peculiar
faculty, some brilliant talent. Their attitude seemed to imply that she
was a kind of conversational mountebank, attired, intellectually, in
gauze and spangles. This attitude gave a certain ironical force to
Madame Münster’s next words. “Now this is your circle,” she said to her
uncle. “This is your _salon_. These are your regular _habitués_, eh? I
am so glad to see you all together.”

“Oh,” said Mr. Wentworth, “they are always dropping in and out. You
must do the same.”

“Father,” interposed Charlotte Wentworth, “they must do something
more.” And she turned her sweet, serious face, that seemed at once
timid and placid, upon their interesting visitor. “What is your name?”
she asked.

“Eugenia-Camilla-Dolores,” said the Baroness, smiling. “But you needn’t
say all that.”

“I will say Eugenia, if you will let me. You must come and stay with
us.”

The Baroness laid her hand upon Charlotte’s arm very tenderly; but she
reserved herself. She was wondering whether it would be possible to
“stay” with these people. “It would be very charming—very charming,”
she said; and her eyes wandered over the company, over the room. She
wished to gain time before committing herself. Her glance fell upon
young Mr. Brand, who stood there, with his arms folded and his hand on
his chin, looking at her. “The gentleman, I suppose, is a sort of
ecclesiastic,” she said to Mr. Wentworth, lowering her voice a little.

“He is a minister,” answered Mr. Wentworth.

“A Protestant?” asked Eugenia.

“I am a Unitarian, madam,” replied Mr. Brand, impressively.

“Ah, I see,” said Eugenia. “Something new.” She had never heard of this
form of worship.

Mr. Acton began to laugh, and Gertrude looked anxiously at Mr. Brand.

“You have come very far,” said Mr. Wentworth.

“Very far—very far,” the Baroness replied, with a graceful shake of her
head—a shake that might have meant many different things.

“That’s a reason why you ought to settle down with us,” said Mr.
Wentworth, with that dryness of utterance which, as Eugenia was too
intelligent not to feel, took nothing from the delicacy of his meaning.

She looked at him, and for an instant, in his cold, still face, she
seemed to see a far-away likeness to the vaguely remembered image of
her mother. Eugenia was a woman of sudden emotions, and now,
unexpectedly, she felt one rising in her heart. She kept looking round
the circle; she knew that there was admiration in all the eyes that
were fixed upon her. She smiled at them all.

“I came to look—to try—to ask,” she said. “It seems to me I have done
well. I am very tired; I want to rest.” There were tears in her eyes.
The luminous interior, the gentle, tranquil people, the simple, serious
life—the sense of these things pressed upon her with an overmastering
force, and she felt herself yielding to one of the most genuine
emotions she had ever known. “I should like to stay here,” she said.
“Pray take me in.”

Though she was smiling, there were tears in her voice as well as in her
eyes. “My dear niece,” said Mr. Wentworth, softly. And Charlotte put
out her arms and drew the Baroness toward her; while Robert Acton
turned away, with his hands stealing into his pockets.




CHAPTER IV


A few days after the Baroness Münster had presented herself to her
American kinsfolk she came, with her brother, and took up her abode in
that small white house adjacent to Mr. Wentworth’s own dwelling of
which mention has already been made. It was on going with his daughters
to return her visit that Mr. Wentworth placed this comfortable cottage
at her service; the offer being the result of a domestic colloquy,
diffused through the ensuing twenty-four hours, in the course of which
the two foreign visitors were discussed and analyzed with a great deal
of earnestness and subtlety. The discussion went forward, as I say, in
the family circle; but that circle on the evening following Madame
Münster’s return to town, as on many other occasions, included Robert
Acton and his pretty sister. If you had been present, it would probably
not have seemed to you that the advent of these brilliant strangers was
treated as an exhilarating occurrence, a pleasure the more in this
tranquil household, a prospective source of entertainment. This was not
Mr. Wentworth’s way of treating any human occurrence. The sudden
irruption into the well-ordered consciousness of the Wentworths of an
element not allowed for in its scheme of usual obligations required a
readjustment of that sense of responsibility which constituted its
principal furniture. To consider an event, crudely and baldly, in the
light of the pleasure it might bring them was an intellectual exercise
with which Felix Young’s American cousins were almost wholly
unacquainted, and which they scarcely supposed to be largely pursued in
any section of human society. The arrival of Felix and his sister was a
satisfaction, but it was a singularly joyless and inelastic
satisfaction. It was an extension of duty, of the exercise of the more
recondite virtues; but neither Mr. Wentworth, nor Charlotte, nor Mr.
Brand, who, among these excellent people, was a great promoter of
reflection and aspiration, frankly adverted to it as an extension of
enjoyment. This function was ultimately assumed by Gertrude Wentworth,
who was a peculiar girl, but the full compass of whose peculiarities
had not been exhibited before they very ingeniously found their pretext
in the presence of these possibly too agreeable foreigners. Gertrude,
however, had to struggle with a great accumulation of obstructions,
both of the subjective, as the metaphysicians say, and of the
objective, order; and indeed it is no small part of the purpose of this
little history to set forth her struggle. What seemed paramount in this
abrupt enlargement of Mr. Wentworth’s sympathies and those of his
daughters was an extension of the field of possible mistakes; and the
doctrine, as it may almost be called, of the oppressive gravity of
mistakes was one of the most cherished traditions of the Wentworth
family.

“I don’t believe she wants to come and stay in this house,” said
Gertrude; Madame Münster, from this time forward, receiving no other
designation than the personal pronoun. Charlotte and Gertrude acquired
considerable facility in addressing her, directly, as “Eugenia;” but in
speaking of her to each other they rarely called her anything but
“she.”

“Doesn’t she think it good enough for her?” cried little Lizzie Acton,
who was always asking unpractical questions that required, in
strictness, no answer, and to which indeed she expected no other answer
than such as she herself invariably furnished in a small,
innocently-satirical laugh.

“She certainly expressed a willingness to come,” said Mr. Wentworth.

“That was only politeness,” Gertrude rejoined.

“Yes, she is very polite—very polite,” said Mr. Wentworth.

“She is too polite,” his son declared, in a softly growling tone which
was habitual to him, but which was an indication of nothing worse than
a vaguely humorous intention. “It is very embarrassing.”

“That is more than can be said of you, sir,” said Lizzie Acton, with
her little laugh.

“Well, I don’t mean to encourage her,” Clifford went on.

“I’m sure I don’t care if you do!” cried Lizzie.

“She will not think of you, Clifford,” said Gertrude, gravely.

“I hope not!” Clifford exclaimed.

“She will think of Robert,” Gertrude continued, in the same tone.

Robert Acton began to blush; but there was no occasion for it, for
everyone was looking at Gertrude—everyone, at least, save Lizzie, who,
with her pretty head on one side, contemplated her brother.

“Why do you attribute motives, Gertrude?” asked Mr. Wentworth.

“I don’t attribute motives, father,” said Gertrude. “I only say she
will think of Robert; and she will!”

“Gertrude judges by herself!” Acton exclaimed, laughing. “Don’t you,
Gertrude? Of course the Baroness will think of me. She will think of me
from morning till night.”

“She will be very comfortable here,” said Charlotte, with something of
a housewife’s pride. “She can have the large northeast room. And the
French bedstead,” Charlotte added, with a constant sense of the lady’s
foreignness.

“She will not like it,” said Gertrude; “not even if you pin little
tidies all over the chairs.”

“Why not, dear?” asked Charlotte, perceiving a touch of irony here, but
not resenting it.

Gertrude had left her chair; she was walking about the room; her stiff
silk dress, which she had put on in honor of the Baroness, made a sound
upon the carpet. “I don’t know,” she replied. “She will want something
more—more private.”

“If she wants to be private she can stay in her room,” Lizzie Acton
remarked.

Gertrude paused in her walk, looking at her. “That would not be
pleasant,” she answered. “She wants privacy and pleasure together.”

Robert Acton began to laugh again. “My dear cousin, what a picture!”

Charlotte had fixed her serious eyes upon her sister; she wondered
whence she had suddenly derived these strange notions. Mr. Wentworth
also observed his younger daughter.

“I don’t know what her manner of life may have been,” he said; “but she
certainly never can have enjoyed a more refined and salubrious home.”

Gertrude stood there looking at them all. “She is the wife of a
Prince,” she said.

“We are all princes here,” said Mr. Wentworth; “and I don’t know of any
palace in this neighborhood that is to let.”

“Cousin William,” Robert Acton interposed, “do you want to do something
handsome? Make them a present, for three months, of the little house
over the way.”

“You are very generous with other people’s things!” cried his sister.

“Robert is very generous with his own things,” Mr. Wentworth observed
dispassionately, and looking, in cold meditation, at his kinsman.

“Gertrude,” Lizzie went on, “I had an idea you were so fond of your new
cousin.”

“Which new cousin?” asked Gertrude.

“I don’t mean the Baroness!” the young girl rejoined, with her laugh.
“I thought you expected to see so much of him.”

“Of Felix? I hope to see a great deal of him,” said Gertrude, simply.

“Then why do you want to keep him out of the house?”

Gertrude looked at Lizzie Acton, and then looked away.

“Should you want me to live in the house with you, Lizzie?” asked
Clifford.

“I hope you never will. I hate you!” Such was this young lady’s reply.

“Father,” said Gertrude, stopping before Mr. Wentworth and smiling,
with a smile the sweeter, as her smile always was, for its rarity; “do
let them live in the little house over the way. It will be lovely!”

Robert Acton had been watching her. “Gertrude is right,” he said.
“Gertrude is the cleverest girl in the world. If I might take the
liberty, I should strongly recommend their living there.”

“There is nothing there so pretty as the northeast room,” Charlotte
urged.

“She will make it pretty. Leave her alone!” Acton exclaimed.

Gertrude, at his compliment, had blushed and looked at him: it was as
if someone less familiar had complimented her. “I am sure she will make
it pretty. It will be very interesting. It will be a place to go to. It
will be a foreign house.”

“Are we very sure that we need a foreign house?” Mr. Wentworth
inquired. “Do you think it desirable to establish a foreign house—in
this quiet place?”

“You speak,” said Acton, laughing, “as if it were a question of the
poor Baroness opening a wine-shop or a gaming-table.”

“It would be too lovely!” Gertrude declared again, laying her hand on
the back of her father’s chair.

“That she should open a gaming-table?” Charlotte asked, with great
gravity.

Gertrude looked at her a moment, and then, “Yes, Charlotte,” she said,
simply.

“Gertrude is growing pert,” Clifford Wentworth observed, with his
humorous young growl. “That comes of associating with foreigners.”

Mr. Wentworth looked up at his daughter, who was standing beside him;
he drew her gently forward. “You must be careful,” he said. “You must
keep watch. Indeed, we must all be careful. This is a great change; we
are to be exposed to peculiar influences. I don’t say they are bad. I
don’t judge them in advance. But they may perhaps make it necessary
that we should exercise a great deal of wisdom and self-control. It
will be a different tone.”

Gertrude was silent a moment, in deference to her father’s speech; then
she spoke in a manner that was not in the least an answer to it. “I
want to see how they will live. I am sure they will have different
hours. She will do all kinds of little things differently. When we go
over there it will be like going to Europe. She will have a boudoir.
She will invite us to dinner—very late. She will breakfast in her
room.”

Charlotte gazed at her sister again. Gertrude’s imagination seemed to
her to be fairly running riot. She had always known that Gertrude had a
great deal of imagination—she had been very proud of it. But at the
same time she had always felt that it was a dangerous and irresponsible
faculty; and now, to her sense, for the moment, it seemed to threaten
to make her sister a strange person who should come in suddenly, as
from a journey, talking of the peculiar and possibly unpleasant things
she had observed. Charlotte’s imagination took no journeys whatever;
she kept it, as it were, in her pocket, with the other furniture of
this receptacle—a thimble, a little box of peppermint, and a morsel of
court-plaster. “I don’t believe she would have any dinner—or any
breakfast,” said Miss Wentworth. “I don’t believe she knows how to do
anything herself. I should have to get her ever so many servants, and
she wouldn’t like them.”

“She has a maid,” said Gertrude; “a French maid. She mentioned her.”

“I wonder if the maid has a little fluted cap and red slippers,” said
Lizzie Acton. “There was a French maid in that play that Robert took me
to see. She had pink stockings; she was very wicked.”

“She was a _soubrette_,” Gertrude announced, who had never seen a play
in her life. “They call that a soubrette. It will be a great chance to
learn French.” Charlotte gave a little soft, helpless groan. She had a
vision of a wicked, theatrical person, clad in pink stockings and red
shoes, and speaking, with confounding volubility, an incomprehensible
tongue, flitting through the sacred penetralia of that large, clean
house. “That is one reason in favor of their coming here,” Gertrude
went on. “But we can make Eugenia speak French to us, and Felix. I mean
to begin—the next time.”

Mr. Wentworth had kept her standing near him, and he gave her his
earnest, thin, unresponsive glance again. “I want you to make me a
promise, Gertrude,” he said.

“What is it?” she asked, smiling.

“Not to get excited. Not to allow these—these occurrences to be an
occasion for excitement.”

She looked down at him a moment, and then she shook her head. “I don’t
think I can promise that, father. I am excited already.”

Mr. Wentworth was silent a while; they all were silent, as if in
recognition of something audacious and portentous.

“I think they had better go to the other house,” said Charlotte,
quietly.

“I shall keep them in the other house,” Mr. Wentworth subjoined, more
pregnantly.

Gertrude turned away; then she looked across at Robert Acton. Her
cousin Robert was a great friend of hers; she often looked at him this
way instead of saying things. Her glance on this occasion, however,
struck him as a substitute for a larger volume of diffident utterance
than usual, inviting him to observe, among other things, the
inefficiency of her father’s design—if design it was—for diminishing,
in the interest of quiet nerves, their occasions of contact with their
foreign relatives. But Acton immediately complimented Mr. Wentworth
upon his liberality. “That’s a very nice thing to do,” he said, “giving
them the little house. You will have treated them handsomely, and,
whatever happens, you will be glad of it.” Mr. Wentworth was liberal,
and he knew he was liberal. It gave him pleasure to know it, to feel
it, to see it recorded; and this pleasure is the only palpable form of
self-indulgence with which the narrator of these incidents will be able
to charge him.

“A three days’ visit at most, over there, is all I should have found
possible,” Madame Münster remarked to her brother, after they had taken
possession of the little white house. “It would have been too
_intime_—decidedly too _intime_. Breakfast, dinner, and tea _en
famille_—it would have been the end of the world if I could have
reached the third day.” And she made the same observation to her maid
Augustine, an intelligent person, who enjoyed a liberal share of her
confidence. Felix declared that he would willingly spend his life in
the bosom of the Wentworth family; that they were the kindest,
simplest, most amiable people in the world, and that he had taken a
prodigious fancy to them all. The Baroness quite agreed with him that
they were simple and kind; they were thoroughly nice people, and she
liked them extremely. The girls were perfect ladies; it was impossible
to be more of a lady than Charlotte Wentworth, in spite of her little
village air. “But as for thinking them the best company in the world,”
said the Baroness, “that is another thing; and as for wishing to live
_porte à porte_ with them, I should as soon think of wishing myself
back in the convent again, to wear a bombazine apron and sleep in a
dormitory.” And yet the Baroness was in high good humor; she had been
very much pleased. With her lively perception and her refined
imagination, she was capable of enjoying anything that was
characteristic, anything that was good of its kind. The Wentworth
household seemed to her very perfect in its kind—wonderfully peaceful
and unspotted; pervaded by a sort of dove-colored freshness that had
all the quietude and benevolence of what she deemed to be Quakerism,
and yet seemed to be founded upon a degree of material abundance for
which, in certain matters of detail, one might have looked in vain at
the frugal little court of Silberstadt-Schreckenstein. She perceived
immediately that her American relatives thought and talked very little
about money; and this of itself made an impression upon Eugenia’s
imagination. She perceived at the same time that if Charlotte or
Gertrude should ask their father for a very considerable sum he would
at once place it in their hands; and this made a still greater
impression. The greatest impression of all, perhaps, was made by
another rapid induction. The Baroness had an immediate conviction that
Robert Acton would put his hand into his pocket every day in the week
if that rattle-pated little sister of his should bid him. The men in
this country, said the Baroness, are evidently very obliging. Her
declaration that she was looking for rest and retirement had been by no
means wholly untrue; nothing that the Baroness said was wholly untrue.
It is but fair to add, perhaps, that nothing that she said was wholly
true. She wrote to a friend in Germany that it was a return to nature;
it was like drinking new milk, and she was very fond of new milk. She
said to herself, of course, that it would be a little dull; but there
can be no better proof of her good spirits than the fact that she
thought she should not mind its being a little dull. It seemed to her,
when from the piazza of her eleemosynary cottage she looked out over
the soundless fields, the stony pastures, the clear-faced ponds, the
rugged little orchards, that she had never been in the midst of so
peculiarly intense a stillness; it was almost a delicate sensual
pleasure. It was all very good, very innocent and safe, and out of it
something good must come. Augustine, indeed, who had an unbounded faith
in her mistress’s wisdom and far-sightedness, was a great deal
perplexed and depressed. She was always ready to take her cue when she
understood it; but she liked to understand it, and on this occasion
comprehension failed. What, indeed, was the Baroness doing _dans cette
galère_? what fish did she expect to land out of these very stagnant
waters? The game was evidently a deep one. Augustine could trust her;
but the sense of walking in the dark betrayed itself in the physiognomy
of this spare, sober, sallow, middle-aged person, who had nothing in
common with Gertrude Wentworth’s conception of a soubrette, by the most
ironical scowl that had ever rested upon the unpretending tokens of the
peace and plenty of the Wentworths. Fortunately, Augustine could quench
skepticism in action. She quite agreed with her mistress—or rather she
quite out-stripped her mistress—in thinking that the little white house
was pitifully bare. _“Il faudra,”_ said Augustine, _“lui faire un peu
de toilette.”_ And she began to hang up _portières_ in the doorways; to
place wax candles, procured after some research, in unexpected
situations; to dispose anomalous draperies over the arms of sofas and
the backs of chairs. The Baroness had brought with her to the New World
a copious provision of the element of costume; and the two Miss
Wentworths, when they came over to see her, were somewhat bewildered by
the obtrusive distribution of her wardrobe. There were India shawls
suspended, curtain-wise, in the parlor door, and curious fabrics,
corresponding to Gertrude’s metaphysical vision of an opera-cloak,
tumbled about in the sitting-places. There were pink silk blinds in the
windows, by which the room was strangely bedimmed; and along the
chimney-piece was disposed a remarkable band of velvet, covered with
coarse, dirty-looking lace. “I have been making myself a little
comfortable,” said the Baroness, much to the confusion of Charlotte,
who had been on the point of proposing to come and help her put her
superfluous draperies away. But what Charlotte mistook for an almost
culpably delayed subsidence Gertrude very presently perceived to be the
most ingenious, the most interesting, the most romantic intention.
“What is life, indeed, without curtains?” she secretly asked herself;
and she appeared to herself to have been leading hitherto an existence
singularly garish and totally devoid of festoons.

Felix was not a young man who troubled himself greatly about
anything—least of all about the conditions of enjoyment. His faculty of
enjoyment was so large, so unconsciously eager, that it may be said of
it that it had a permanent advance upon embarrassment and sorrow. His
sentient faculty was intrinsically joyous, and novelty and change were
in themselves a delight to him. As they had come to him with a great
deal of frequency, his life had been more agreeable than appeared.
Never was a nature more perfectly fortunate. It was not a restless,
apprehensive, ambitious spirit, running a race with the tyranny of
fate, but a temper so unsuspicious as to put Adversity off her guard,
dodging and evading her with the easy, natural motion of a wind-shifted
flower. Felix extracted entertainment from all things, and all his
faculties—his imagination, his intelligence, his affections, his
senses—had a hand in the game. It seemed to him that Eugenia and he had
been very well treated; there was something absolutely touching in that
combination of paternal liberality and social considerateness which
marked Mr. Wentworth’s deportment. It was most uncommonly kind of him,
for instance, to have given them a house. Felix was positively amused
at having a house of his own; for the little white cottage among the
apple trees—the chalet, as Madame Münster always called it—was much
more sensibly his own than any domiciliary _quatrième_, looking upon a
court, with the rent overdue. Felix had spent a good deal of his life
in looking into courts, with a perhaps slightly tattered pair of elbows
resting upon the ledge of a high-perched window, and the thin smoke of
a cigarette rising into an atmosphere in which street-cries died away
and the vibration of chimes from ancient belfries became sensible. He
had never known anything so infinitely rural as these New England
fields; and he took a great fancy to all their pastoral roughnesses. He
had never had a greater sense of luxurious security; and at the risk of
making him seem a rather sordid adventurer I must declare that he found
an irresistible charm in the fact that he might dine every day at his
uncle’s. The charm was irresistible, however, because his fancy flung a
rosy light over this homely privilege. He appreciated highly the fare
that was set before him. There was a kind of fresh-looking abundance
about it which made him think that people must have lived so in the
mythological era, when they spread their tables upon the grass,
replenished them from cornucopias, and had no particular need of
kitchen stoves. But the great thing that Felix enjoyed was having found
a family—sitting in the midst of gentle, generous people whom he might
call by their first names. He had never known anything more charming
than the attention they paid to what he said. It was like a large sheet
of clean, fine-grained drawing-paper, all ready to be washed over with
effective splashes of water-color. He had never had any cousins, and he
had never before found himself in contact so unrestricted with young
unmarried ladies. He was extremely fond of the society of ladies, and
it was new to him that it might be enjoyed in just this manner. At
first he hardly knew what to make of his state of mind. It seemed to
him that he was in love, indiscriminately, with three girls at once. He
saw that Lizzie Acton was more brilliantly pretty than Charlotte and
Gertrude; but this was scarcely a superiority. His pleasure came from
something they had in common—a part of which was, indeed, that physical
delicacy which seemed to make it proper that they should always dress
in thin materials and clear colors. But they were delicate in other
ways, and it was most agreeable to him to feel that these latter
delicacies were appreciable by contact, as it were. He had known,
fortunately, many virtuous gentlewomen, but it now appeared to him that
in his relations with them (especially when they were unmarried) he had
been looking at pictures under glass. He perceived at present what a
nuisance the glass had been—how it perverted and interfered, how it
caught the reflection of other objects and kept you walking from side
to side. He had no need to ask himself whether Charlotte and Gertrude,
and Lizzie Acton, were in the right light; they were always in the
right light. He liked everything about them: he was, for instance, not
at all above liking the fact that they had very slender feet and high
insteps. He liked their pretty noses; he liked their surprised eyes and
their hesitating, not at all positive way of speaking; he liked so much
knowing that he was perfectly at liberty to be alone for hours,
anywhere, with either of them; that preference for one to the other, as
a companion of solitude, remained a minor affair. Charlotte Wentworth’s
sweetly severe features were as agreeable as Lizzie Acton’s wonderfully
expressive blue eyes; and Gertrude’s air of being always ready to walk
about and listen was as charming as anything else, especially as she
walked very gracefully. After a while Felix began to distinguish; but
even then he would often wish, suddenly, that they were not all so sad.
Even Lizzie Acton, in spite of her fine little chatter and laughter,
appeared sad. Even Clifford Wentworth, who had extreme youth in his
favor, and kept a buggy with enormous wheels and a little sorrel mare
with the prettiest legs in the world—even this fortunate lad was apt to
have an averted, uncomfortable glance, and to edge away from you at
times, in the manner of a person with a bad conscience. The only person
in the circle with no sense of oppression of any kind was, to Felix’s
perception, Robert Acton.

It might perhaps have been feared that after the completion of those
graceful domiciliary embellishments which have been mentioned Madame
Münster would have found herself confronted with alarming possibilities
of _ennui_. But as yet she had not taken the alarm. The Baroness was a
restless soul, and she projected her restlessness, as it may be said,
into any situation that lay before her. Up to a certain point her
restlessness might be counted upon to entertain her. She was always
expecting something to happen, and, until it was disappointed,
expectancy itself was a delicate pleasure. What the Baroness expected
just now it would take some ingenuity to set forth; it is enough that
while she looked about her she found something to occupy her
imagination. She assured herself that she was enchanted with her new
relatives; she professed to herself that, like her brother, she felt it
a sacred satisfaction to have found a family. It is certain that she
enjoyed to the utmost the gentleness of her kinsfolk’s deference. She
had, first and last, received a great deal of admiration, and her
experience of well-turned compliments was very considerable; but she
knew that she had never been so real a power, never counted for so
much, as now when, for the first time, the standard of comparison of
her little circle was a prey to vagueness. The sense, indeed, that the
good people about her had, as regards her remarkable self, no standard
of comparison at all gave her a feeling of almost illimitable power. It
was true, as she said to herself, that if for this reason they would be
able to discover nothing against her, so they would perhaps neglect to
perceive some of her superior points; but she always wound up her
reflections by declaring that she would take care of that.

Charlotte and Gertrude were in some perplexity between their desire to
show all proper attention to Madame Münster and their fear of being
importunate. The little house in the orchard had hitherto been occupied
during the summer months by intimate friends of the family, or by poor
relations who found in Mr. Wentworth a landlord attentive to repairs
and oblivious of quarter-day. Under these circumstances the open door
of the small house and that of the large one, facing each other across
their homely gardens, levied no tax upon hourly visits. But the Misses
Wentworth received an impression that Eugenia was no friend to the
primitive custom of “dropping in;” she evidently had no idea of living
without a door-keeper. “One goes into your house as into an inn—except
that there are no servants rushing forward,” she said to Charlotte. And
she added that that was very charming. Gertrude explained to her sister
that she meant just the reverse; she didn’t like it at all. Charlotte
inquired why she should tell an untruth, and Gertrude answered that
there was probably some very good reason for it which they should
discover when they knew her better. “There can surely be no good reason
for telling an untruth,” said Charlotte. “I hope she does not think
so.”

They had of course desired, from the first, to do everything in the way
of helping her to arrange herself. It had seemed to Charlotte that
there would be a great many things to talk about; but the Baroness was
apparently inclined to talk about nothing.

“Write her a note, asking her leave to come and see her. I think that
is what she will like,” said Gertrude.

“Why should I give her the trouble of answering me?” Charlotte asked.
“She will have to write a note and send it over.”

“I don’t think she will take any trouble,” said Gertrude, profoundly.

“What then will she do?”

“That is what I am curious to see,” said Gertrude, leaving her sister
with an impression that her curiosity was morbid.

They went to see the Baroness without preliminary correspondence; and
in the little salon which she had already created, with its becoming
light and its festoons, they found Robert Acton.

Eugenia was intensely gracious, but she accused them of neglecting her
cruelly. “You see Mr. Acton has had to take pity upon me,” she said.
“My brother goes off sketching, for hours; I can never depend upon him.
So I was to send Mr. Acton to beg you to come and give me the benefit
of your wisdom.”

Gertrude looked at her sister. She wanted to say, “_That_ is what she
would have done.” Charlotte said that they hoped the Baroness would
always come and dine with them; it would give them so much pleasure;
and, in that case, she would spare herself the trouble of having a
cook.

“Ah, but I must have a cook!” cried the Baroness. “An old negress in a
yellow turban. I have set my heart upon that. I want to look out of my
window and see her sitting there on the grass, against the background
of those crooked, dusky little apple trees, pulling the husks off a
lapful of Indian corn. That will be local color, you know. There isn’t
much of it here—you don’t mind my saying that, do you?—so one must make
the most of what one can get. I shall be most happy to dine with you
whenever you will let me; but I want to be able to ask you sometimes.
And I want to be able to ask Mr. Acton,” added the Baroness.

“You must come and ask me at home,” said Acton. “You must come and see
me; you must dine with me first. I want to show you my place; I want to
introduce you to my mother.” He called again upon Madame Münster, two
days later. He was constantly at the other house; he used to walk
across the fields from his own place, and he appeared to have fewer
scruples than his cousins with regard to dropping in. On this occasion
he found that Mr. Brand had come to pay his respects to the charming
stranger; but after Acton’s arrival the young theologian said nothing.
He sat in his chair with his two hands clasped, fixing upon his hostess
a grave, fascinated stare. The Baroness talked to Robert Acton, but, as
she talked, she turned and smiled at Mr. Brand, who never took his eyes
off her. The two men walked away together; they were going to Mr.
Wentworth’s. Mr. Brand still said nothing; but after they had passed
into Mr. Wentworth’s garden he stopped and looked back for some time at
the little white house. Then, looking at his companion, with his head
bent a little to one side and his eyes somewhat contracted, “Now I
suppose that’s what is called conversation,” he said; “real
conversation.”

“It’s what I call a very clever woman,” said Acton, laughing.

“It is most interesting,” Mr. Brand continued. “I only wish she would
speak French; it would seem more in keeping. It must be quite the style
that we have heard about, that we have read about—the style of
conversation of Madame de Staël, of Madame Récamier.”

Acton also looked at Madame Münster’s residence among its hollyhocks
and apple trees. “What I should like to know,” he said, smiling, “is
just what has brought Madame Récamier to live in that place!”




CHAPTER V


Mr. Wentworth, with his cane and his gloves in his hand, went every
afternoon to call upon his niece. A couple of hours later she came over
to the great house to tea. She had let the proposal that she should
regularly dine there fall to the ground; she was in the enjoyment of
whatever satisfaction was to be derived from the spectacle of an old
negress in a crimson turban shelling peas under the apple trees.
Charlotte, who had provided the ancient negress, thought it must be a
strange household, Eugenia having told her that Augustine managed
everything, the ancient negress included—Augustine who was naturally
devoid of all acquaintance with the expurgatory English tongue. By far
the most immoral sentiment which I shall have occasion to attribute to
Charlotte Wentworth was a certain emotion of disappointment at finding
that, in spite of these irregular conditions, the domestic arrangements
at the small house were apparently not—from Eugenia’s peculiar point of
view—strikingly offensive. The Baroness found it amusing to go to tea;
she dressed as if for dinner. The tea-table offered an anomalous and
picturesque repast; and on leaving it they all sat and talked in the
large piazza, or wandered about the garden in the starlight, with their
ears full of those sounds of strange insects which, though they are
supposed to be, all over the world, a part of the magic of summer
nights, seemed to the Baroness to have beneath these western skies an
incomparable resonance.

Mr. Wentworth, though, as I say, he went punctiliously to call upon
her, was not able to feel that he was getting used to his niece. It
taxed his imagination to believe that she was really his half-sister’s
child. His sister was a figure of his early years; she had been only
twenty when she went abroad, never to return, making in foreign parts a
willful and undesirable marriage. His aunt, Mrs. Whiteside, who had
taken her to Europe for the benefit of the tour, gave, on her return,
so lamentable an account of Mr. Adolphus Young, to whom the headstrong
girl had united her destiny, that it operated as a chill upon family
feeling—especially in the case of the half-brothers. Catherine had done
nothing subsequently to propitiate her family; she had not even written
to them in a way that indicated a lucid appreciation of their suspended
sympathy; so that it had become a tradition in Boston circles that the
highest charity, as regards this young lady, was to think it well to
forget her, and to abstain from conjecture as to the extent to which
her aberrations were reproduced in her descendants. Over these young
people—a vague report of their existence had come to his ears—Mr.
Wentworth had not, in the course of years, allowed his imagination to
hover. It had plenty of occupation nearer home, and though he had many
cares upon his conscience the idea that he had been an unnatural uncle
was, very properly, never among the number. Now that his nephew and
niece had come before him, he perceived that they were the fruit of
influences and circumstances very different from those under which his
own familiar progeny had reached a vaguely-qualified maturity. He felt
no provocation to say that these influences had been exerted for evil;
but he was sometimes afraid that he should not be able to like his
distinguished, delicate, lady-like niece. He was paralyzed and
bewildered by her foreignness. She spoke, somehow, a different
language. There was something strange in her words. He had a feeling
that another man, in his place, would accommodate himself to her tone;
would ask her questions and joke with her, reply to those pleasantries
of her own which sometimes seemed startling as addressed to an uncle.
But Mr. Wentworth could not do these things. He could not even bring
himself to attempt to measure her position in the world. She was the
wife of a foreign nobleman who desired to repudiate her. This had a
singular sound, but the old man felt himself destitute of the materials
for a judgment. It seemed to him that he ought to find them in his own
experience, as a man of the world and an almost public character; but
they were not there, and he was ashamed to confess to himself—much more
to reveal to Eugenia by interrogations possibly too innocent—the
unfurnished condition of this repository.

It appeared to him that he could get much nearer, as he would have
said, to his nephew; though he was not sure that Felix was altogether
safe. He was so bright and handsome and talkative that it was
impossible not to think well of him; and yet it seemed as if there were
something almost impudent, almost vicious—or as if there ought to be—in
a young man being at once so joyous and so positive. It was to be
observed that while Felix was not at all a serious young man there was
somehow more of him—he had more weight and volume and resonance—than a
number of young men who were distinctly serious. While Mr. Wentworth
meditated upon this anomaly his nephew was admiring him unrestrictedly.
He thought him a most delicate, generous, high-toned old gentleman,
with a very handsome head, of the ascetic type, which he promised
himself the profit of sketching. Felix was far from having made a
secret of the fact that he wielded the paint-brush, and it was not his
own fault if it failed to be generally understood that he was prepared
to execute the most striking likenesses on the most reasonable terms.
“He is an artist—my cousin is an artist,” said Gertrude; and she
offered this information to everyone who would receive it. She offered
it to herself, as it were, by way of admonition and reminder; she
repeated to herself at odd moments, in lonely places, that Felix was
invested with this sacred character. Gertrude had never seen an artist
before; she had only read about such people. They seemed to her a
romantic and mysterious class, whose life was made up of those
agreeable accidents that never happened to other persons. And it merely
quickened her meditations on this point that Felix should declare, as
he repeatedly did, that he was really not an artist. “I have never gone
into the thing seriously,” he said. “I have never studied; I have had
no training. I do a little of everything, and nothing well. I am only
an amateur.”

It pleased Gertrude even more to think that he was an amateur than to
think that he was an artist; the former word, to her fancy, had an even
subtler connotation. She knew, however, that it was a word to use more
soberly. Mr. Wentworth used it freely; for though he had not been
exactly familiar with it, he found it convenient as a help toward
classifying Felix, who, as a young man extremely clever and active and
apparently respectable and yet not engaged in any recognized business,
was an importunate anomaly. Of course the Baroness and her brother—she
was always spoken of first—were a welcome topic of conversation between
Mr. Wentworth and his daughters and their occasional visitors.

“And the young man, your nephew, what is his profession?” asked an old
gentleman—Mr. Broderip, of Salem—who had been Mr. Wentworth’s classmate
at Harvard College in the year 1809, and who came into his office in
Devonshire Street. (Mr. Wentworth, in his later years, used to go but
three times a week to his office, where he had a large amount of highly
confidential trust-business to transact.)

“Well, he’s an amateur,” said Felix’s uncle, with folded hands, and
with a certain satisfaction in being able to say it. And Mr. Broderip
had gone back to Salem with a feeling that this was probably a
“European” expression for a broker or a grain exporter.

“I should like to do your head, sir,” said Felix to his uncle one
evening, before them all—Mr. Brand and Robert Acton being also present.
“I think I should make a very fine thing of it. It’s an interesting
head; it’s very mediaeval.”

Mr. Wentworth looked grave; he felt awkwardly, as if all the company
had come in and found him standing before the looking-glass. “The Lord
made it,” he said. “I don’t think it is for man to make it over again.”

“Certainly the Lord made it,” replied Felix, laughing, “and he made it
very well. But life has been touching up the work. It is a very
interesting type of head. It’s delightfully wasted and emaciated. The
complexion is wonderfully bleached.” And Felix looked round at the
circle, as if to call their attention to these interesting points. Mr.
Wentworth grew visibly paler. “I should like to do you as an old
prelate, an old cardinal, or the prior of an order.”

“A prelate, a cardinal?” murmured Mr. Wentworth. “Do you refer to the
Roman Catholic priesthood?”

“I mean an old ecclesiastic who should have led a very pure, abstinent
life. Now I take it that has been the case with you, sir; one sees it
in your face,” Felix proceeded. “You have been very—a very