The Project Gutenberg eBook of Terminal Compromise
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

*** This is a COPYRIGHTED Project Gutenberg eBook. Details Below. ***
***     Please follow the copyright guidelines in this file.      ***


Title: Terminal Compromise

Author: Winn Schwartau


        
Release date: August 1, 1993 [eBook #79]
                Most recently updated: December 23, 2011

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/79


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TERMINAL COMPROMISE ***















"Terminal Compromise" by Winn Schwartau

Who thanks you for your consideration.

                    INTER.PACT Press
                    11511 Pine St.
                    Seminole, FL  34642

     All contents are (C) 1991, 1992, 1993 Inter.Pact




      THE WORLD'S FIRST NOVEL-ON-THE-NET (tm) SHAREWARE!!!
                       By Inter.Pact Press

                      "TERMINAL COMPROMISE"
                        by Winn Schwartau

     A high tech thriller that comes from today's headlines!

"The Tom Clancy of computer security."
          Assoc. Prof. Dr. Karen Forcht, James Madison University

"Terminal  Compromise" is a highly praised novel about the  inva-
sion of the United States by computer terrorists.

Since  it was first published in conventional print form,  (ISBN:
0-962-87000-5)  it has sold extremely well world-wide,  but  then
again,  it never hit the New York Times Bestseller  List  either.
But that's OK, not many do.

Recently,  someone we know very well came up with a  real  bright
idea.   They suggested  that INTER.PACT Press take  the  unprece-
dented,  and maybe slightly crazy, step to put "Terminal  Compro-
mise" on the Global Network thus creating a new category for book
publishers.   The  idea is to offer  "Terminal  Compromise,"  and
perhaps  other titles at NOVEL-ON-THE-NET SHAREWARE(tm) rates  to
millions  of people who just don't spend a lot of time  in  book-
stores.   After  discussions with dozens of people -  maybe  even
more than a hundred - we decided to do just that.   We know  that
we're  taking a chance, but we've been convinced by  hackers  and
phreakers and corporate types and government representatives that
putting "Terminal Compromise" on the net would be a fabulous step
forward  into  the Electronic Age, (Cyberspace if you  will)  and
would encourage other publishers to take advantage of  electronic
distribution.   (It's still in the bookstores, though.)

To  the  best of our  knowledge,  no  semi-sorta-kinda-legitimate
-publisher has ever put a complete pre-published 562 page book on
the  network  as a form of Shareware.  So, I guess  we're  making
news  as  well as providing a service to the  world's  electronic
community.   The recommended NOVEL-ON-THE-NET SHAREWARE fees  are
outlined later (this is how we stay in business), so please  read
on.

WE KEEP THE COPYRIGHTS!

"Terminal  Compromise"  is  NOT  being  entered  into  the  public
domain.   It  is  being  distributed  electronically  so  hundreds
of thousands more  people  can enjoy it and  understand just where
we are heading with  our  omnipresent  interconnectedness  and the
potential dangers we face.  INTER.PACT Press  maintains  all copy-
rights to "Terminal Compromise" and does not, either intentionally
or  otherwise,  explicitly  or implicitly,  waive  any  rights  to
this  piece  of  work or  recourses  deemed  appropriate.  (Damned
lawyers.)

(C) 1991, 1992, 1993, Inter.Pact Press



                TERMINAL COMPROMISE - THE REVIEWS

" . . . a must read . . ."
          Digital News

"Schwartau  knows  about  networks and security  and  creates  an
interesting plot that will keep readers turning the pages."
          Computer World

"Terminal  Compromise  is  fast-paced  and  gripping.   Schwartau
explains complex technology facilely and without condescension."
          Government Computer News

"An  incredibly fascinating tale of international intrigue . .  .
action  .  . . characterization . . . deserves attention  .  .  .
difficult to imagine a more comprehensive resource."
          PC Laptop

"Schwartau   .  . . has a definite flair for  intrigue  and  plot
twists.   (He) makes it clear that the most important  assets  at
risk are America's right to privacy and our democratic ideals."
          Personal Identification News

"I  am  all  too familiar with the  appalling  realities  in  Mr.
Schwartau's book.  (A) potentially catastrophic situation."
          Chris Goggans, Ex-Legion of Doom Member.

"  . . .  chilling scenarios . . . ",  "For light summer  reading
with  weighty implications . . . ",  " . . .  thought  provoking,
sometimes chilling . . . "

Remember, it's only fiction.  Or is it?



                  TERMINAL COMPROMISE: SYNOPSIS

"It's all about the information . . . the information."
                         From "Sneakers"

Taki Homosoto, silver haired Chairman of Japan's huge OSO  Indus-
tries,  survived Hiroshima; his family didn't. Homosoto  promises
revenge  against the United States before he dies.  His  passion-
ate, almost obsessive hatred of everything American finally comes
to a head when he acts upon his desires.

With  unlimited resources, he comes up with the ultimate  way  to
strike back at the enemy. Miles  Foster, a brilliant 33 year old
mathematician   apparently isn't  exactly  fond of America either.
The  National  Security  Agency wanted  his  skills, but his back-
ground and "family" connections kept him from advancing within the
intelligence  community.  His  insatiable - borderline psychotic-
sex drive  balances  the intensity  of waging war against his own
country to  the  highest bidder.

Scott  Mason,  made  his fortune selling high tech  toys  to  the
Pentagon.   Now as a New York City Times reporter,  Mason  under-
stands  both  the good and the evil of technology  and  discovers
pieces  of  the terrible plot which is designed  to  destroy  the
economy of the United States.

Tyrone  Duncan, a physically huge 50-ish black senior  FBI  agent
who suffered through the Hoover Age indignities, befriends  Scott
Mason.  Tyrone provides the inside government track and confusion
from competing agencies to deal with the threats.  His altruistic
and  somewhat pure innate view of the world finally makes him  do
the right thing.

As  Homosoto's  plan evolves, Arab zealots,  German  intelligence
agents and a host of technical mercenaries find the weaknesses in
our  techno-economic  infrastructure.   Victims  find  themselves
under  attack by unseen adversaries; Wall Street suffers  debili-
tating  blows; Ford and Chrysler endure massive shut downs.   The
U.S. economy suffers a series of crushing blows.

From  the White House to the Pentagon to the CIA to the  National
Security Agency and FBI, a complex weaving of fascinating politi-
cal characters find themselves enmeshed a battle of the New World
Order.   Sex,  drugs, rock'n'roll: Tokyo,  Vienna,  Paris,  Iraq,
Iran.  It's all here.

Enjoy reading "Terminal Compromise."



                     SHAREWARE - NOVEL FEES:

We hope that you enjoy "Terminal Compromise" as much as  everyone
else  has, and that you will send us a few shekels  according  to
the following guidelines.

The  NOVEL-ON-THE-NET SHAREWARE(tm)  fees for us as a  publishing
company  are no different than the fees for software  application
shareware publishers, and the intent is the same.  So please, let
us continue this form of publishing in the future.


NOVEL-ON-THE-NET SHAREWARE Fees For The People:

The suggested donation for individuals is $7.  If you hate Termi-
nal Compromise after reading it, then only send $6.50.  If you're
really, really broke, then tell a hundred other people how  great
it was, send us a rave review and post it where you think  others
will enjoy reading it, too.  If you're only a little broke,  send
a few dollars.  After all, this is how we stay in business.  With
each  registration, we will also send a FREE! issue of  "Security
Insider Report," a monthly security newsletter also published  by
Inter.Pact Press.


NOVEL-ON-THE-NET SHAREWARE Fees For Businesses:

We  hope  that  you put "Terminal Compromise"  on  your  internal
networks so that your employees will have the chance to enjoy  it
as well.  It's a great way to increase security awareness amongst
this  country's 50,000,000 rank and file computer  users.   Plus,
it's a hell of a good read.

One  company  plans  on  releasing  a  chapter  every  few   days
throughout its E-Mail system as a combination of security  aware-
ness  and employee 'perc'.  Try it; it works and  your  employees
will  appreciate it.  Why?  Because they'll all talk about  it  -
bringing security awareness to the forefront of discussion.

FEES

Distribution for up to 100 people on a single network:  $   500
     (Includes 1 Year subscription to "Security Insider Report.")

Distribution for up to 1000 people on a single network: $  3000
     (Includes  10  1  Year subscriptions  to  "Security  Insider
     Report.")

Distribution for up to 2500 people on a single network: $  6250
     (Includes  1  Year  electronic  Corporate  site  license  to
     "Security Insider Report.")

Distribution for up to 5000 people on a single network: $  10000
     (Includes  1  Year  electronic  Corporate  site  license  to
     "Security Insider Report.")

Distribution for up to 10000 people on a single network: $ 15000
     (Includes  1  Year  electronic  Corporate  site  license  to
     "Security Insider Report.")

Distribution for up to 25000 people on a single network: $ 25000
     (Includes  1  Year  electronic  Corporate  site  license  to
     "Security Insider Report.")

Distribution for more than that - Please call and we'll figure it
out.   Would  you like us to coordinate  a  special  distribution
program  for you?  Would you like in Postscript or  other  visual
formats?  Give us a call and we'll see what we can do.

                       * * * * * * * * * *
     Please  DO NOT UPLOAD AND DISTRIBUTE  "Terminal  Compromise"
     into  your networks unless you intend on paying  the  recom-
     mended fees.

                       * * * * * * * * * *


NOVEL-ON-THE-NET SHAREWARE Fees for Universities:  FREE!

"Terminal Compromise" has been used by many schools and universi-
ties  as a teaching supplement.  Recognized Educational  institu-
tions  are entitled to use "Terminal Compromise" at NO  COST,  as
long  as you register with us that you are doing so. Please  pro-
vide: School name, address, etc., the course, the instructor, and
the  reason for using it.  Also, we'd like to hear from  you  and
tell us how it went. Thanks.


SHAREWARE-NOVEL Fees for Local, State and Federal Governments.

     You have the money.  :-)  Please send some back by following
     the same fee guidelines as those for businesses.

     Government  employees:  You are The People - same  fees  are
     appreciated.

                       * * * * * * * * * *

     Agencies: Do not upload and distribute "Terminal Compromise"
     unless you plan on paying the fees.

                      * * * * * * * * * * *


NOVEL-ON-THE-NET SHAREWARE Fees for the International Community
     Make payments in $US, please.

GETTING TERMINAL COMPROMISE:

     You  can get your copy of Terminal Compromise from a lot  of
sites; if you don't see it, just ask around.

It  consists of either 2 or 5 files, depending upon how  you  re-
ceive it. (Details at end of this file.)

Feel  free to post all five files of "Terminal  Compromise"  any-
where  on the net or on public or private BBS's as long  as  this
file accompanies it as well.


Please forward all NOVEL-ON-THE-NET SHAREWARE fees to:

     INTER.PACT PRESS
     11511 Pine St. N.
     Seminole, FL., 34642

Communications:

     Phn: 813-393-6600
     Fax: 813-393-6361
     E-Mail: p00506@psi.com
             wschwartau@mcimail.com

We will accept checks, money orders, and cash if you must, and we
mean  if you must.  It's not the smartest thing in the  world  to
send  cash through the mail.  We are NOT equipped at  this  point
for credit cards.

Remember, "Terminal Compromise is copyrighted, and we will vigor-
ously pursue violations of that copyright.  (Lawyers made us  say
it again.)

If you ABSOLUTELY LOVE "Terminal Compromise," or find that  after
50 pages of On-Screen reading, you may want a hard copy for  your
bookshelf.   It  is  available  from  bookstores  nationwide  for
$19.95,  or from Inter.Pact directly for $19.95 + $3.50  shipping
and handling.  If you first paid the $ 7 NOVEL-ON-THE-NET  SHARE-
WARE  fee, send in proof and we'll deduct $ 7 from the  price  of
the hard copy edition.

ISBN: 0-962-87000-5

Enjoy "Terminal Compromise" and help us make it an easy  decision
to put more books on the Global Network.

Thank you in advance for your attention and your consideration.



The Publishers,
INTER.PACT Press



****************************************************************

Note to the Readers of "Terminal Compromise:"

In writing a book like this, it is often difficult to distinguish
fact from fiction.

That  is because the fiction is all too probable, and  the  facts
are  unbelievable.  Maybe it doesn't matter and they're the  same
after all.  Other than a few well known names and incidents,  the
events in this book are fictional - to the best of my knowledge.

As  I wrote this tale, I was endlessly coming upon  new  methods,
new  tactics, new ways to wage computer warfare. I found that  if
this story was to be told, I had to accept the fact that it would
always be unfinished.  The battle of the computers is one without
an end in sight.

This story is an attempt to merge the facts as they are with  the
possibilities.   The  delineation  between fact  and  fiction  is
clouded  because the fiction of yesterday is the fact, the  news,
of  today.  I expect that distinction to become hazier  over  the
next few years.

It  is that incongruity that spawns a  conjectured  extrapolation
indistinguishable from reality.

The  construction of the model that gave birth to this  tale  was
the culmination of many years of work, with a fictional narrative
being  the last thing in my mind.  That was an accident  necessi-
tated by a need to reach the largest possible audience.

In  fact, a lot of things have surprised me since "Terminal  Com-
promise"  was  first published.  It seemed that we were  able  to
predict a number of things including Polymorphics, Clipper Chips,
non-lethal  warfare . . . and you'll recognize a few other  prog-
nostications we didn't expect to come to pass quite yet.

The reader will soon know why.

There  were many people who have been invaluable in the  prepara-
tion  of  this  document, but I'll only mention a  few.   If  the
reader  doesn't want to hear about my friends, please move on  to
the next chapter.

Mary C. Bell.  Hi, Mom.  Thanks for the flashlight.

Lazarus Cuttman.  The greatest editor a writer has ever had.   He
kept me honest.

Miles  Roban.  That's an alias.  He's the one who told  me  about
the real NSA.  I hope he doesn't get in trouble for what he said.
I owe him a pound of M&Ms.  2 lbs. of them.  (NOTE: For over  two
years, according to 'high-up' sources, the NSA has been and still
is  looking for 'Miles'.  They haven't found him yet, despite  an
intensive internal NSA search.  We need more people like  'Miles'
who are willing to break down the conventional barriers of  secu-
rity on issues that affect us all.)

Dad.  God rest.

Winn Schwartau, July, 1993

****************************************************************

          "Terminal Compromise" is dedicated to:

Sherra
There is no adequate way to say thank you.  You are the super-glue
of the family.  Let's continue to break the rules.
I Love You

Ashley
She  wrote  three books before I finished the first  chapter  and
then became a South-Paw.

Adam
Welcome, pilgrim.

****************************************************************

Prologue

  Friday, January 12, The Year After
  The White House, Washington D.C.

The President was furious.  In all of his professional  political
life, not even his closest aids or his wife had ever seen him  so
totally  out  of character.  The placid  Southern  confidence  he
normally  exuded, part well designed media image, part real,  was
completely shattered.

"Are  you  telling me that we spent almost $4  trillion  dollars,
four goddamn trillion dollars on defense, and we're not  prepared
to  defend our computers?  You don't have a game plan?  What  the
hell  have we been doing for the last 12 years?"   The  President
bellowed  as loudly as anyone could remember. No one in the  room
answered. The President  glared right through each of his  senior
aides.

"Damage Assessment Potential?"  The President said abruptly as he
forced a fork full of scrambled eggs into his mouth.

"The  Federal  Reserve and most Banking transactions  come  to  a
virtual standstill.  Airlines grounded save for emergency  opera-
tions.    Telephone  communications  running at 30%  or  less  of
capacity.   No  Federal payments for weeks.  Do you  want  me  to
continue?"

"No, I get the picture."

The  President  wished to God he wouldn't be  remembered  as  the
President who allowed the United States of America to slip  back-
ward 50 years.  He waited for the steam in his collar to  subside
before saying anything he might regret.

* * * * *

  Monday, August 6, 1945.
  Japan

The classroom was coming to order.  Shinzo Ito, the 12th graders'
instructor  was running a few minutes late and the students  were
in a fervent discussion about the impending end to the war.   And
of  course  it  was to be a Japanese victory  over  the  American
Mongrels.

Ito-san  was only 19 years old, and most of the senior class  was
only  a year or two younger than he. The war had deeply  affected
all  of  them. The children of Japan were  well  acquainted  with
suffering and pain as families were wrenched apart - literally at
the seams, and expected to hold themselves together by the  honor
that their sacrifices represented.  They hardened, out of  neces-
sity,  in order to survive and make it through the next day,  the
next week; and so they knew much about the war.  Since so many of
the men had gone to war, women and children ran the country.   10
and 11 year old students from the schools worked as phone  opera-
tors. It was an honorable cause, and everyone contributed; it was
only  fitting.  Their fathers and loved ones were fighting  self-
lessly and winning the war.

Many  of  the children's fathers had gone to war, valiantly,  and
many  had not come home.  Many came home in pieces, many  others,
unrecognizable.  And when some fathers had gone off to war,  both
they and their families knew that would never return.  They  were
making the Supreme Sacrifice for their country,  and more  impor-
tantly, a contribution to their honorable way of life.

The sons and daughters of kamikazes were treated with near rever-
ence.   It  was  widely believed that their  father's  honor  was
handed down to their offspring as soon as word had been  received
the mission had been successful. Albeit a suicide mission.

Taki Homosoto was one 17 year old boy so revered for his father's
sacrifice.  Taki spoke confidently about such matters, about  the
war,  about American atrocities, and how Japan would soon  defeat
the round faced enemy.  Taki had understood, on his 17th birthday
that  his  father would leave . . .and assuredly die as  was  the
goal  of the kamikaze.  He pretended to understand that  it  made
sense to him.

In the last 6 months since his father had left, Taki assumed,  at
his  father's  request,  the patriarchal role  in  the  immediate
family.  The  personal  anguish  had  been  excruciating.   While
friends and family and officials praised Taki's father and  fami-
ly,  inside Taki did not accept that a man could willingly  leave
his family, his children, him . . .Taki, never to return.  Didn't
his father love him? Or his sister and brother?  Or his mother?

Taki's  mother got a good job at one of the defense  plants  that
permeated  Hiroshima, while Taki and his brother and sister  con-
tinued  their schooling. But the praise, the respect didn't  make
up for not having a father to talk to, to play with and to  study
with.  He loved his mother, but she wasn't a father.

So  Taki compensated and overcompensated and pretended  that  his
father's  sacrifice  was just, and good, and for  the  better  of
society,  and  the war effort and his family.  Taki  spoke  as  a
juvenile  expert on the war and the good of Japan and the bad  of
the  United  States and the filthy Americans  with  their  unholy
practices  and  perverted  ways of life, and  how  they  tortured
Japanese  prisoners.  Taki was an eloquent and convincing  orator
to his piers and instructors alike.

At  8:15  A.M., the Hiroshima radio station, NHK,  rang  its  old
school  bell.   The bell was part of a warning  system  that  an-
nounced impending attacks from the air, but it had been so  over-
used  that it was mostly ignored.  The tolls from the  bell  were
barely  noticed  by the students or the teachers in  the  Honkawa
School.   Taki  though,  looked out the window  toward  the  Aioi
Bridge. His ears perked and his eyes scanned the clear skies over
downtown  Hiroshima.   He was sure he heard something  .  .  .but
no . . .

The  first sensation of motion in the steel  reinforced  building
came  long  seconds after the blinding light. Since  the  rolling
earth  motions in 1923 devastated much of  Tokyo,  schoolchildren
and  households nationwide practiced earthquake preparedness  and
were reasonably expectant of another major tremor at any time.

But  the combination of light from 10,000 suns and the  deafening
roar  gave those who survived the blast reason to wish they  had-
n't.   Blindness  was instant for those who saw the  sky  ignite.
The  classroom  was collapsing around them.  In the air  was  the
noise of a thousand trains at once...even louder.  In seconds the
schoolhouse was in rubble.

The  United States  of American had just dropped the Atomic  Bomb
on Hiroshima, Japan.  This infamous event would soon be known  as
ayamachi -  the Great Mistake.

* * * * *

  Tuesday, August 7, 1945

Taki  Homosoto opened his  eyes.   He knew he was laying  on  his
back,  but  all else was a clutter of confusion.  He saw  a  dark
ceiling,  to what he didn't know and he hurt He turned  his  head
and  saw  he was on a cot, maybe a bed, in a long  corridor  with
many  others  around him.   The room reeked of  human  waste  and
death.

"Ah . . .you are awake.  It has been much time."  The voice  came
from  behind  him.  He turned his head rapidly  and  realized  he
shouldn't  have.  The pain speared him from his neck to the  base
of  his spine.  Taki grimaced and made a feeble attempt at  whim-
pering.   He said nothing as he examined the figure in the  white
coat  who spoke again. "You are a very lucky young man, not  many
made it."

What was he talking about . . .made it?   Who?  His brain  wanted
to speak but his mouth couldn't.  A slight gurgling noise ushered
from  his  throat  but nothing else.  And the pain .  .  .it  was
everywhere  at  once  . . .all over . . .he wanted  to  cry   for
help  . . .but was unable.  The pain overtook Taki  Homosoto  and
the vision of the doctor blackened until there was no more.

Much later, Taki reawoke.   He assumed it was a long time  later,
he  been  awake  earlier  . . .or had that  been  a  dream.   The
doctor...no   he was in school and the earthquake . .  .yes,  the
earthquake  .  . .why don't I remember?  I was knocked  out.   Of
course.  As his eyes adjusted to the room, he saw and  remembered
that it wasn't a dream.  He saw the other cots, so many  of them,
stretching in every direction amidst the cries of pain and  sighs
of death.

Taki  tried to cry out to a figure walking nearby but only a  low
pitched   moan   ushered  forth.   Then  he   noticed   something
odd  .  .  .and  odd smell.  One he  didn't  recognize.   It  was
foul  . . .the stench of burned . . .burned what?  The odor  made
him sick and he tried to breathe through his mouth but the  awful
odor  still  penetrated his glands.  Taki knew that he  was  very
hurt and very sick and so were a lot of others.  It took him some
time,  and a lot of energy just to clear his thoughts.   Thinking
hurt  -  it concentrated the aching in his head, but  the  effort
took  away  some of his other pain, or at least  it  successfully
distracted him focussing on it.

There  were  cries from all around.  Many  were  incomprehensible
babblings, obviously in agony.  Screams of "Eraiyo!", ("the  pain
is  unbearable!") were constant.  Others begged to be put out  of
their  misery.   Taki actually felt fortunate; he  couldn't  have
screamed if he had wanted to, but out of guilt he no longer  felt
the need to.

Finally,  the same doctor, was it the same doctor? appeared  over
his  bed again.  "I hope you'll stay with us for a few  minutes?"
The  doctor  smiled.  Taki responded as best he  could.   With  a
grunt and the raising and lowering his eyelids.  "Let me just say
that  you  are in very good condition . . .much better  than  the
others,"  the doctor gestured across the room.  "I don't mean  to
sound cruel, but, we do need your bed, for those seriously hurt."
The doctor sounded truly distraught.  What had happened?

A  terrified  look crossed Taki's face that ceded into  a  facial
plead.    His   look   said,  "I  can't  speak   so   answer   my
questions  .  . .you must know what they are. Where  am  I?  What
happened? Where is my class?"

"I  understand  your name is Taki Homosoto?"  the  doctor  asked.
"Your school identification papers . . ."

Taki blinked an affirmative as he tried to cough out a response.

"There is no easy way to tell this.  We must all be brave. Ameri-
ca  has used a terrible weapon upon the people of Japan.  A  spe-
cial  new  bomb so terrible that Hiroshima is no  longer  even  a
shadow of itself. A weapon where the sky turns to fire and build-
ings and our people melt . . .where the water sickens the  living
and  those  who seem well drop in their steps from  an  invisible
enemy. Almost half of the people of Hiroshima are dead or  dying.
As I said, you are a lucky one."

Taki helped over the next days at the Communications Hospital  in
what  was left of downtown Hiroshima.  When he wasn't tending  to
the dying, he moved the dead to the exits so the bodies could  be
cremated, the one way  to insure eternal salvation.  The city got
much of its light from pyres for weeks after the blasts.

He  helped distribute the kanpan and cold rice balls to the  very
few doctors and to survivors who were able to eat.  He walked the
streets  of Hiroshima looking for food, supplies,  anything  that
could help.  Walking through the rubble of what once was Hiroshi-
ma  fueled  his  hate and his loathing for  Americans.  They  had
wrought  this  suffering by using their  pikadon,  or  flash-boom
weapon, on civilians, women and children. He saw death, terrible,
ugly death, everywhere; from Hijiyama Hill to the bridges a cross
the wide Motoyas River.

The  Aioi  bridge spontaneously became an  impromptu  symbol  for
vengeance  against the Americans.  Taki crossed the  remnants  of
the old stone bridge, which was to be the hypocenter of the blast
if  the Enola Gay hadn't missed its target by 800 feet.   A  tall
blond  man  in an American military uniform was tied to  a  stone
post.   He  was an American POW, one of 23 in  Hiroshima.  A  few
dozen  people, women in bloodstained kimonos and mompei and  near
naked  children  were hurling rocks and insults at  the  lifeless
body.  How appropriate thought Taki.  He found himself mindlessly
joining in.  He threw rocks at the head, the body, the legs.   He
threw rocks and yelled.  He threw rocks and yelled at the remains
of the dead serviceman until his arms and lungs ached.

Another 50,000 Japanese died from the effects of radiation within
days  while Taki continued to heal physically.   On August 17,  9
days after the atomic bombing of Nagasaki and 2 days after Emper-
or  Hirohito's broadcast announcing Japan's surrender, a  typhoon
swamped  Hiroshima  and killed thousands more.  Taki  blamed  the
Americans for the typhoon, too.

Taki was alone for the first time in his life.  His family  dead,
even  his  little sister.  Taki Homosoto was now a  hibakusha,  a
survivor  of Hiroshima, an embarrassing and dishonorable fact  he
would desperately try to conceal for the rest of his life.

* * * * *

  Forty Years Later . . .
  January, 1985, Gaithersburg,  Maryland.

A pristine layer of thick soft snow covered the sprawling  office
and laboratory filled campus where the National Bureau of  Stand-
ards sets standards for the country.  The NBS establishes exactly
what  the time is, to the nearest millionth of a millionth  of  a
second.   They make sure that we weigh things to the accuracy  of
the weight of an individual atom.  The NBS is a veritable techno-
logical  benchmark  to  which everyone agrees, if  for  no  other
reason than convenience.

It  was  the NBS's turn to host the  National  Computer  Security
Conference  where the Federal government was ostensibly  supposed
to  interface  with  academia and the business  world.   At  this
exclusive  symposium,  only two years before, the  Department  of
Defense  introduced a set of guidelines which  detailed  security
specifications to be used by the Federal agencies and recommended
for the private sector.

A very dry group of techno-wizards and techno-managers and  tech-
no-bureaucrats  assemble for several days, twice a year, to  dis-
cuss  the latest developments in biometric identifications  tech-
niques, neural based cryptographic analysis, exponential  factor-
ing  in  public key management, the subtleties  of  discretionary
access control and formalization of verification models.

The National Computer Security Center is a Department of  Defense
working group substantially managed by the super secret  National
Security  Agency.   The NCSC's charter in life  is  to  establish
standards and procedures for securing the US Government's comput-
ers from compromise.

1985's high point was an award banquet with slightly ribald
speeches.  Otherwise the conference was essentially a maze of
highly complex presentations, meaningless to anyone not well
versed  in computers, security and government-speak.  An  attend-
ee's competence could be well gauged by his use of acronyms.  "If
the  IRS  had DAC across its X.25 gateways,  it  could  integrate
X9.17  management,  DES, MAC and X9.9 could be  used  throughout.
Save the government a bunch!"  "Yeah, but the DoD had an RFI  for
an RFQ that became a RFP, specced by NSA and based upon TD-80-81.
It  was  isolated, environmentally  speaking."   Boring,  thought
Miles  Foster.   Incredibly boring, but it was his  job  to  sit,
listen and learn.

Miles  Foster was a security and communications analyst with  the
National Security Agency at Fort Meade, Maryland.  It was part of
the regimen to attend such functions to stay on top of the latest
developments from elsewhere in the government and from university
and private research programs.

Out  of the 30 or so panels that Miles Foster had to attend,  pro
forma, only one held any real interest for him.  It was a  mathe-
matical  presentation entitled, "Propagation Tendencies  in  Self
Replicating  Software".   It was the one subject title  from  the
conference guide about which he knew nothing.  He tried to figure
out  what the talk was going to be about, but the answer  escaped
him until he heard what Dr. Les Brown had to say.

Miles Foster wrote an encapsulated report of Dr. Brown's  presen-
tation with the 23 other synopses he was required to generate for
the NSA.  Proof of Attendance.

SUBJECT:
Dr. Les Brown - Professor of Computer Science, Sheffield  Univer-
sity.  Dr. Brown presented an updated version of his PhD thesis.

CONTENTS:
Dr. Brown spoke about unique characteristics of certain  software
that  can  be written to be self-replicating.   He  examined  the
properties of software code in terms of set theory and adequately
demonstrated  that software can be written with the sole  purpose
of  disguising  its  true intents, and then  replicate  or  clone
itself throughout a computer system without the knowledge of  the
computer's operators.

He  further described classes of software that, if  designed  for
specific  purposes, would have undetectable characteristics.   In
the  self replicating class, some would have  crystalline  behav-
iors,  others  mutating behaviors, and others  random  behaviors.
The set theory presentations closely paralleled biological trans-
mission characteristics and similar problems with disease  detec-
tion and immunization.

It  became quite clear from the Dr. Brown's talk, that  surrepti-
tiously  placed software with self-replicating  properties  could
have deleterious effects on the target computing system.

CONCLUSIONS

It appears prudent to further examine this class of software  and
the  ramifications  of its use.  Dr. Brown  presented  convincing
evidence  that such propagative effects can bypass existing  pro-
tective  mechanisms  in sensitive data  processing  environments.
There  is indeed reason to believe that software of  this  nature
might  have  certain offensive military applications.  Dr.  Brown
used the term 'Virus' to describe such classes of software.

Signed, Miles Foster
Senior Analyst
Y-Group/SF6-143G-1

After he completed his observations of the conference as a whole,
and the seminars in particular, Miles Foster decided to eliminate
Dr. Brown's findings from the final submission to his  superiors.
He wasn't sure why he left it out, it just seemed like the  right
thing to do.

****************************************************************


                            Chapter 1
     August, 4 Years Ago.
     National Security Agency
     Fort George S. Meade, Maryland.

Thousands  of  disk drives spun rapidly, at over 3600  rpm.   The
massive  computer  room, Computer Room C-12, gently  whirred  and
droned with a life of its own.  The sublime, light blue walls and
specially fitted blue tint light bulbs added a calming  influence
to  the  constant urgency that drove the computer  operators  who
pushed  buttons, changed tapes and stared at the dozens of  amber
screens on the computers.

Racks  upon  racks of foreboding electronic  equipment  rung  the
walls of Room C-12 with arrays of tape drives interspersed.  Rats
nests  of wire and cable crept along the floor and in and out  of
the  control centers for the hundreds of millions of  dollars  of
the  most sophisticated computers in the world.  Only five  years
ago,  computing  power of this magnitude, now fit in a  room  the
size of an average house would have filled the Pentagon.  All  of
this, all of this power, for one man.

Miles Foster was locked in a room without windows. It contained a
table,  4 chairs, and he was sure a couple of cameras and  micro-
phones.  He had been held for a least six hours, maybe more; they
had taken his watch to distort his time perception.

Within 2 minutes of the time Miles Foster announced his  resigna-
tions  as  a  communications expert with  the  National  Security
Agency,  S Group, his office was sealed and guarded by  an  armed
marine.  His computer was disconnected, and he was escorted to  a
debriefing  room  where he had  sporadically  answered  questions
asked by several different Internal Affairs Security Officers.

While  Miles Foster was under virtual house arrest, not the  pre-
ferred term, but an accurate one, the Agency went to work.   From
C-12,  a  group of IAS officers began to  accumulate  information
about  Miles Foster from a vast array of computer  memory  banks.
They  could dial up any major computer system within  the  United
States, and most around the world.  The  purpose, ostensibly,  of
having  such  power  was to centralize and  make  more  efficient
security checks on government employees, defense contractors  and
others who might have an impact on the country's national securi-
ty.  But, it had other purposes, too.

Computer  Room  C-12 is classified above Top  Secret,  it's  very
existence  denied by the NSA, the National Security  Agency,  and
unknown to all but a very few of the nation's top policy  makers.
Congress  knows  nothing of it and the President  was  only  told
after  it  had been completed, black funded by  a  non-line  item
accountable   budget.   Computer  Room C-12 is one  of  only  two
electronic doors into the National Data Base - a digital  reposi-
tory  containing the sum total knowledge and working profiles  of
every  man,  woman  and child in the United  States.   The  other
secret  door  that guards America's privacy is  deep  within  the
bowels of the Pentagon.

From  C-12,  IAS  accessed every bank record in  the  country  in
Miles'  name, social security number or in that of his  immediate
family.   Savings,  checking, CD's.  They had  printouts,  within
seconds, of all of their last year's credit card activity.   They
pulled 3 years tax records from the IRS, medical records from the
National  Medical Data Base which connects hospitals  nationwide,
travel  records  from American carriers,  customs  checks,  video
rental history, telephone records, stock purchases. Anything that
any  computer  ever knew about Miles Foster was printed  and  put
into eleven 6" thick files within 2 hours of the request from the
DIRNSA, Director, National Security Agency.

Internal Affairs was looking for some clue as to why a successful
and  highly talented analyst like Miles Foster would so  abruptly
resign  a  senior analyst position.  While Miles  was  more  than
willing  to tell them his feelings, and the real  reasons  behind
his  resignation, they wanted to make sure that there  weren't  a
few  little details he wasn't telling them.  Like,  perhaps  gam-
bling  debts, women on the side, (he was single) or women on  the
wrong side, overextended financial obligations, anything unusual.
Had  he suddenly come into money and if he did, where did he  get
it?  Blackmail was considered a very real possibility when  unex-
pected personnel changes occur.

The files vindicated Miles Foster of any obvious financial anoma-
lies. Not that he knew he needed vindication.  He owned a Potomac
condominium in D.C., a 20 minutes against traffic commute to Fort
Meade  where he had worked for years, almost his  entire  profes-
sional life.  He traveled some, Caribbean cruises, nothing osten-
tatious but in style, had a reasonable savings account, only used
2 credit cards and he owed no one anything significant. There was
nothing  unusual  about his file at all, unless  you  think  that
living  within ones means is odd.  Miles Foster knew how to  make
the most out of a dollar.  Miles Foster was clean.

The  walls  of his drab 12 foot square prison room were  a  dirty
shade  of government gray.  There was an old map on the wall  and
Miles  noticed  that the gray paint behind the it  was  7  shades
lighter  than the surrounding paint. Two of the four  fluorescent
bulbs were out, hiding some of the peeling paint on the  ceiling.
Against one wall was a row of file cabinets with large iron  bars
behind  the  drawer handles, insuring that no one,  no  one,  was
getting into those file with permission.  Also prominent on  each
file cabinet was a tissue box sized padlock.

Miles was alone, again.  When the IAS people questioned him, they
were  hard on him. Very hard. But most of the time he was  alone.
Miles  paced the room during the prolonged waits. He  poked  here
and there, under this, over that; he found the clean paint behind
the map and smirked.

When the IAS men returned, they found Miles stretching and  exer-
cising his svelte 5' 9" physique to help relieve the boredom.

He  was 165 lbs. and in excellent for almost 40.  Miles wasn't  a
fitness  nut,  but he enjoyed the results of staying in  shape  -
women,  lots  of women.  He had a  lightly  tanned  Mediterranean
skin, dark, almost black wavy hair on the longish side but immac-
ulately styled. His demeanor dripped elegance, even when he  wore
torn jeans, and he knew it.  It was merely another personal asset
that Miles had learned how to use to his best advantage.    Miles
was  regularly  proofed. He had a face that would permit  him  to
assume any age from 20 to 40, but given his borderline arrogance,
he  called it aloofness, most considered him the younger.   None-
theless, women, of all ages went for it.

One peculiar trait made women and girls find Miles  irresistible.
He had an eerie but conscious muscular control over his  dimples.
If he were angry, a frown could mean any number of things depend-
ing  upon how he twitched his dimples.  A frown could mean,  "I'm
real  angry, seriously", or "I'm just giving you shit", or   "You
bore me, go away", or more to Miles' purpose, "You're gorgeous, I
wanna  fuck  your brains out".   His dimples could  pout  with  a
smile, grin with a sneer, emphasize a question; they could accent
and augment his mood at will.

But now. he was severely bored.  Getting even more disgusted with
the  entire process.  The IAS wasn't going to find  anything.  He
had made sure of that.  After all, he was the computer expert.

Miles heard the sole door to the room unlock.  It was a heavy, 'I
doubt  an ax could even get through this' door.  The  fourth  IAS
man  to question Miles entered the room as the door was  relocked
from the other side.

"So,  tell  us again, why did you quit?"  The  IAS  man  abruptly
blurted  out even before sitting in one of the old, World War  II
vintage chairs by the wooden table.

"I've told you a hundred times and you have it on tape a  hundred
times."   The disgust in his voice was obvious and intended.   "I
really don't want to go through it again."

"Tough shit.  I want to hear it.  You haven't told me yet."  This
guy was tougher, Miles thought.

"What  are you looking for?  For God's sake, what do you want  me
to say?  You want a lie that you like better?  Tell me what it is
and  I'll give it back to you, word for word.  Is that  what  you
want?"   Miles  gave away something.  He showed, for  the   first
time,  real anger.  The intellect in Miles saw what  the  emotion
was  doing,  so his brain quickly secreted a  complex  string  of
amino  acids to call him down.  Miles decided that he  should  go
back to the naive, 'what did I do?' image and stick to the plan.

He put his head in his hands and leaned forward for a second.  He
gently  shook  and looked up sideways.  He was  very  convincing.
The IAS man thought that Miles might be weakening.

"I want the fucking truth," the IAS man bellowed.  "And I want it
now!"

Miles  sighed.   He was tired and wanted a cigarette  so  bad  he
could shit, and that pleasure, too, he was being denied.  But  he
had prepared himself for this eventuality; serious interrogation.

"O.K.,  O.K." Miles feigned resignation.  He paused  for  another
heavy  sigh.  "I quit 'cause I got sick of the  shit.   Pure  and
simple.   I like my work, I don't like the bureaucracy that  goes
with  it.  That's it.  After over 10 years here, I expected  some
sort  of  recognition other than a cost of living  increase  like
every other G12.  I want to go private where I'll be appreciated.
Maybe even make some money."

The  IAS man didn't look convinced. "What single event  made  you
quit?  Why  this morning, and not yesterday or tomorrow,  or  the
next  day, or next week.  Why today?"  The IAS man blew smoke  at
Miles to annoy him and exaggerate the withdrawal symptoms.  Miles
was exhausted and edgy.

"Like I said, I got back another  'don't call us, we'll call you'
response  on my Public-Private key scheme.  They said,  'Not  yet
practical'  and set it up for another review in 18 months.   That
was  it.  Finis! The end, the proverbial straw that  you've  been
looking for.  Is that what you want?"  Miles tried desperately to
minimize any display of arrogance as he looked at the IAS man.

"What do you hope to do in the private sector?  Most of your work
is classified."  The IAS man remained cool and unflustered.

"Plenty of defense guys who do crypto and need a good comm guy. I
think  the military call it the revolving door."  Miles'  dimpled
smugness did not sit well with IAS.

"Yeah,  you'll  probably  go  to work for  your  wop  friends  in
Sicily." The IAS man sarcastically accused.

"Hey   - you already know about that!"  That royally  pissed  off
Miles.   He  didn't appreciate any dispersion  on  his  heritage.
"They're relatives, that's  it.  Holidays, food, turkey, ham, and
a  bunch  of  booze.   And besides,"  Miles  paused  and  smiled,
"there's no such thing as the Mafia."

By  early evening they let him relieve himself and  then  finally
leave  the Fort. He was given 15 minutes to collect his  personal
items,  under  guard, and then escorted to the front  gate.   All
identification  was removed and his files were  transferred  into
the  'Monitor'  section, where they would sit for  at  least  one
year. The IAS people had finally satisfied themselves that  Miles
Foster was a dissatisfied, underpaid government employee who  had
had enough of the immobility and rigidity of a giant bureaucratic
machine  that moves at a snails pace. Miles smiled at the end  of
the  interrogation.   Just like I said, he thought, just  like  I
said.

There was no record in his psychological profiles, those from the
Agency  shrinks, that suggested  Miles meant anything other  than
what he claimed.  Let him go, they said.  Let him go.  Nowhere in
the  records  did it show how much he hated  his  stupid,  stupid
bosses,  the bungling bureaucratic behemoths who didn't have  the
first  idea  of  what he and his type did.   Nowhere  did  Miles'
frustration  and resultant build up of resentment and anger  show
up  in  any file or on any chart or graph.   His  strong,  almost
overbearing ego and over developed sense of worth and  importance
were  relegated  to  a personality quirk  common  to  superbright
ambitious engineering types.  It fit the profile.

Nowhere,  either,  was it mentioned that in years at  NSA,  Miles
Foster had submitted over 30 unsolicited proposals for changes in
cryptographic and communications techniques to improve the  secu-
rity  of  the United States.  Nowhere did it say, they  were  all
turned down, tabled, ignored.

At  one  point or another, Miles had to snap.  The  rejection  of
proposal  number  thirty-four gave Miles the  perfect  reason  to
quit.

* * * * *

Miles Foster looked 100% Italian despite the fact his father  was
a  pure Irishman.  "Stupido, stupido" his grandmother  would  say
while  slamming the palm of her hand into forehead.  She was  not
exactly fond of her daughter marrying outside family. But, it was
a good marriage, 3 great kids, or as good as kids get and  Grand-
mama  tolerated  the relationship. Miles the oldest, was  only  7
when  his father got killed as a bystander at a supermarket  rob-
bery.

Mario  Dante, his homosexual uncle who worked in some  undefined,
never mentioned  capacity for a Vegas casino, assumed the  pater-
nal role in raising Miles.  With 2 sisters, a mother, an aunt and
a  grandmother  all living under the same  roof with  Miles,  any
male  companionship,  role  model if you  will,  was  acceptable.
Mario  kept  the Family Honor, keeping  his  sexual  proclivities
secret  until  Miles turned 18.  Upon hearing,  Miles  commented,
"Yeah, so?  Everyone knows Uncle Mario's a fag.  Big deal."

Mario  was  a  big important guy, and he  did  business,  grownup
business.   That was all Miles was supposed to know.  When  Miles
was 13, Mario thought it would be a good idea for him  to  become
a  man.   Only 60 miles from Las Vegas lived the  country's  only
legal  brothels.  Very convenient.  Miles  wasn't going  to  fool
around with any of that street  garbage.  Convention girls. Miles
should go first class the first time.

Pahrump, Nevada is home to the only legalized prostitution in the
United States.  Mario drove fast, Miles figured about 130mph,  in
his  Red Ferrari on Highway 10, heading West from  Vegas.   Mario
was  drinking  Glen Fetitch, neat, and he steered with  only  one
hand, hardly looking at the road.

The  inevitable  occurred.  Gaining on them, was a  Nevada  State
Trooper.   The flashing lights and siren reminded Mario  to  slow
down  and  pull over.   He grinned, sipped his  drink  and  Miles
worried.   Speeding  was against the law.  So  was  drinking  and
driving. The police officer walked over to the driver side of the
Ferrari.  Uncle Mario lowered the window to let the officer  lean
into  the  car.   As the trooper bent over  to  look  inside  the
flashy  low slung import, Mario pulled out a handgun  from  under
the seat and stuck it into the cop's face.

Mario started yelling. "Listen asshole, I wasn't speeding. Was I?
I don't want nothing to go on my insurance.  I gotta good driving
record, y'know?"  Mario was crazy! Miles had several strong urges
to severely contract his sphincter muscles.

"No  sir, I wanted to give you a good citizenship  citation,  for
your contributions to the public good."  The cop laughed in Uncle
Mario's face.

"Good  to see you still gotta sensa'humor."  Uncle Mario  laughed
and  put  the gun back in his shoulder  holster.   Miles  stared,
dumbfounded, still squeezing his butt cheeks tight.

"Eh,  Paysan! Where you going so fired up? You know  the  limit's
110?"  They both guffawed.

"Here!"  Mario pointed at Miles. "'Bout time the kid took a  ride
around  the world, y'know what I mean?"  Miles wasn't sure   what
he meant, but he was sure it had to do with where he was going to
lose his virginity.

"Sheeeee-it!  Uptown! Hey kid, ask for Michelle and take  2  from
Column B, then do it once for me!"  Even though they weren't,  to
a 13 year male Italian virgin, Mario and the cop were making  fun
of  him. "I remember my first time.  It was in a pick  up  truck,
out  in the desert.   Went for fucking ever!  Know what  I  mean?
The  cop winked at Miles who was humiliated.  To  Miles'  relief,
Mario  finally  gave the cop an envelope, while  being  teasingly
reprimanded.   "Hey, Mario, take it a little easy out here,  will
yah? At least on my watch, huh?"

"Yeah, sure. No problem.  Ciao."

"Ciao."

They  were off again, doing over 100mph in seconds.  The rest  of
the  evening went as planned.  Miles thanked his uncle in  a  way
that brought tears to Mario's eyes.  Miles said, "You know, Uncle
Mario.  When I grow up, I want to be just like you."

* * * * *

"He's  just a boy, Mario! How could you!"  Miles' mother did  not
react favorably to the news of her son's manhood.  She was trying
to  protect him from the influence of her relatives.   Miles  was
gauged near genius with a pronounced aptitude for mathematics and
she didn't want his life to go to waste.

His mother had married outside of the family, the organized crime
culture, the life one inherits so easily.  She loved her  family,
knew  that  they  dealt in gambling, some  drugs,  an  occasional
rough-up  of an opponent, but preferred to ignore it.   She  mar-
ried  a man she loved, not one picked for he, but had lost him  6
years before. They _could not_ have her son.

Her  wishes  were respected, in the memory of Miles  father,  and
also because it wasn't worth having a crazed Sicilian woman rant-
ing  and raving all about. But Miles was delectable bait  to  the
Family.  His mathematical wizardry could assist greatly in gaming
operations, figure the odds, new angles, keep the dollars in  the
house's favor despite all advertising claims to the contrary.

But, there was respect and honor in their promise to his  mother.
Hands  off was the rule that came all the way from the  top.   He
was  protected. Miles was titillated with the attention,  but  he
still  listened to his mother. She came before all others.   With
no  father,  she became a little of both,  and  despite  anyone's
attempts, Miles knew about Mario.

Miles  was  such a subject of adoration by his mother,  aunt  and
grandmother,  siblings aside, that Miles came to expect the  same
treatment from everyone, especially women.  They praised him  so,
he  always got top honors, the best grades, that he came  to  re-
quire the attention and approval.

Living with 5 women and a gay uncle for 11 years had its  effect.
Miles  was incredibly heterosexual. Not anti-gay at all,  not  at
all. But he had absolutely no interest in men.  He adored  women,
largely  because of his mother.  He put women on  pedestals,  and
treated  them  like queens. Even on a beer budget    Miles  could
convince  his  lady that they were sailing  the  Caribbean  while
baking  in  the desert suburbs of Las  Vegas.   Women  succumbed,
willingly, to Miles' slightest advance.  He craved the  approval,
and worked long and hard to perfect his technique.  Miles  Foster
was  soon an expert.  His mother never openly  disapproved  which
Miles took as approval.

By the time Miles went off to college study advanced  mathematics
and  get a degree, he had shattered half of the  teen-age  hearts
within  50 miles of Vegas. Plus, the admiration from  his  female
family  had allowed him to convince himself that he was going  to
change  the world.  He was the single most important person  that
could  have  an effect on civilization.  Invincible.  Can  do  no
wrong.  Miles  was the end-all to be-all.  If Miles said  it,  it
must  be so, and he bought into the program.  What his mother  or
girl  friends  called self confidence others called  conceit  and
arrogance.  Even obnoxious.

His  third love, after his mother and himself,  was  mathematics.
He  believed in mathematics as the answer to every problem.   All
questions can be reduced to formulas and symbols.  Then, once you
have  them on a piece of paper, or in a computer . . .the  answer
will appear.

His  master thesis was on that very subject.  It was a  brilliant
soliloquy on the reducibility of any multi-dimensional  condition
to a defined set of measured properties.  He postulated that  all
phenomenon  was  discrete  in nature and  none  were  continuous.
Given  that  arguable position, he was able to develop a  set  of
mathematical tools that would permit dissection of a problem into
much smaller pieces.  Once in manageable sizes, the problem would
be worked out piece by piece until the pieces were reassembled as
the  answer.   It was a tool that had very definite uses  in  the
government.

He  was recruited by the Government in 1976.  They wanted him  to
put his ingenious techniques to good use.  The National  Security
Agency  painted  an  idyllic picture of the ultimate  job  for  a
mathematician  - the biggest, fastest and best computers  in  the
world at your fingertips.  Always the newest and the best.  What-
ever  you  need,  it'll be there.  And that's  a  promise.  Super
secret important work - oh how his mother would be proud.   Miles
accepted,  but they never told him the complete truth.  Not  that
they lied, of course.  However, they never bothered to tell  him,
that  because of his family background, guilt by  association  if
you wish, his career would be severely limited.

Miles  made  it to senior analyst, and his family was proud,  but
he  never told them that over 40% of the staff in his  area  were
senior  analysts.  It was a high tech desk job that required  his
particular skills as a mathematician. The NSA got from Miles what
they wanted; his mathematical tools modified to work for  govern-
ment  security  projects.  For a couple of years,  Miles  happily
complied  - then he got itchy to work on other  projects.   After
all, he had come up with the idea in the first place, it was time
he came up with another.  Time to move on.

In typical bureaucratic manner, the only way to get something new
done  is to write a proposal; enlist support and try to  push  it
through committee.  Everyone made proposals. You not only  needed
a good idea for a good project, good enough to justify the use of
8 billion dollars worth of computers, but you needed the  connec-
tions  and assistance of others.  You scratch mine, I'll  scratch
yours.

During  his tenure at NSA, Miles attempted to  institute  various
programs,  procedures, new mathematical modes that might be  use-
ful.   While  technically his concepts were superior,  his  arro-
gance,  his better-than-everyone, my shit doesn't stink  attitude
proved to be an insurmountable political obstacle.  He was unable
to ever garner much support for his proposals.  Thus, not one  of
them was ever taken seriously.  Which compounded the problem  and
reinforced Miles' increasingly sour attitude towards his  employ-
er.  However, with dimples in command, Miles successfully  masked
his disdain.  To all appearance he acceded to the demands of  the
job,  but  off the job, Miles Foster was a  completely  different
person.

* * * * *

The  telephone warbled on the desk of the IAS  Department  Chief.
The digital readout on the phone told him that it was an internal
call, not from outside the building, but he didn't recognize  the
number.

"Investigations,"  The chief answered.

"This is Jacobs.  We're checking up on Foster."

"Yessir?"  DIRNSA?  Calling here?

"Is he gone?"

"Yessir."

"Anything?"

"No sir."

"Good. Close the file."

"Sir?"

"Close it.  Forever."

* * * * *

     September, 4 Years Ago
     Georgetown, Washington, D.C.

Miles  Foster set up shop in Washington D.C. as a  communications
security  consultant.   He  and half of those  who  lived  within
driving distance of the Capitol were known as Beltway Bandits,  a
simultaneously  endearing  and self-deprecating  title  given  to
those  who make their living selling products or services to  the
Federal Government.  Miles was ex-NSA and that was always impres-
sive to potential clients.  He let it be known that his  services
would now be available to the private sector, at the going rates.

As  part  of  the revolving door, from  Government  to  industry,
Miles' value would decrease with time, so he needed to get a  few
clients  quickly.  The day you leave public service all  of  your
knowledge  is  current,  and therefore  valuable,  especially  to
companies  who want to sell widgets to the government.    As  the
days  and months wear on, new policies, new people, new  arrange-
ments  and  confederacies are in place.   Washington's  transient
nature  is  probably no more evident than through  the  political
circle  where  everyone is aware of whom is talking to  whom  and
about  what.  This Miles knew, so he stuck out his  tentacles  to
maximize his salability.

He  restructured  his dating habits.  Normally Miles  would  date
women  whom he knew he could fuck.  He kept track of  their  men-
strual  cycles to make sure they wouldn't waste his time.  If  he
thought a particular female had extraordinary oral sex skills, he
would make sure to seduce when she had her period. Increased  the
odds of good blow job.

Now  though, Miles restricted his dating, temporarily,  to  those
who could help start his career in the private sector.  "Fuck the
secretary to get to the boss!" he bragged unabashedly.

Miles dragged himself to many of the social functions that grease
the  wheels  of motion in Washington.   The  elaborate   affairs,
often  at  the expense of government contractors  and  lobbyists,
were a highly visible, yet totally legal way to shmooze and booze
with the influentia in the nation's capital.  The better parties,
the  ones  for generals, for movers and for shakers,  for  digni-
taries  and  others of immediate importance, are  graced  with  a
generous sprinkling of strikingly beautiful women.  They are paid
for  by  the hosts, for the pleasure of the  their  guests.   The
Washington  culture  requires that such services  are  discreetly
handled.  Expense reports and billings of that  nature  therefore
cite  French Caterers, C.T. Temps, Formal Rentals  and  countless
other  harmless,  inoffensive  and  misleading  sounding  company
names.

Missile  Defense Systems, Inc. held one of the better parties  in
an elegant old 2 story brick Georgetown home.  The building was a
former  embassy, which had been discarded long ago by its  owners
in  favor of a neo-modern structure on Reservoir Road. The  house
was  appointed with a strikingly southern ante-bellum flair,  but
tastefully done, not overly decorated.  The furniture was modern,
comfortable, meant to be and used enjoyed, yet well suited to the
classic formality.

The hot September night was punctuated with an occasional breeze.
The breaths of relief from Washington's muggy, swamp-like  summer
air  were  welcomed by those braving the heat  in  the  manicured
gardens  outside,  rather than the refreshing luxury of  the  air
conditioned indoors.

It  was  a  straight cocktail party, a stand-up  affair,  with  a
hundred  or so Pentagon types attending. It began at  seven,  and
unless tradition was broken, it  would be over by 10 as the  last
of  the girls finds her way into a waiting black  limousine  with
her partner for the night.  Straight politics, Miles thought.

9:30  neared, and Miles felt he had accomplished most of what  he
had  set out to do  - meet people, sell himself, play  the  game,
talk  the line, do the schtick.   He hadn't, though, yet  figured
out how he was going to get laid tonight.

As  he sipped his third Glen Fetitch on the rocks, he  spotted  a
woman  whom  he  hadn't seen that evening.  Maybe  she  had  just
arrived, maybe she was leftovers.  Well, it was getting late, and
he shouldn't let a woman go to waste, so let's see what she looks
like  from  the front.  She looked aimlessly through  the  French
doors at the backyard flora.

Miles  sauntered  over to her and introduced himself.   "Hi,  I'm
Miles  Foster." He grinned wide, dimples in force, as she  turned
toward  him.  She was gorgeous.  Stunning even.   About  an  inch
taller  than Miles, she wore her shimmering auburn hair  shoulder
length.   Angelic,  he thought.  Perfectly formed full  lips  and
statuesque  cheek  bones underscored her  sweetly  intense  brown
eyes. Miles went to work, and by 10P.M., he and Stephanie Perkins
were on their way to Deja Vu on 22nd. and M Street for drinks and
dance.   By 10:30 he had nicknamed her Perky because her  breasts
stood  at constant attention. By 11:30 they were on their way  to
Miles' apartment.

At 2:00 AM Miles was quite satisfied with himself. So was  Perky.
His  technique was perfect. Never a complaint.  Growing up  in  a
houseful without men taught Miles what women wanted.  He  learned
how to give it to them, just the way they liked it.  The  weekend
together  was  heaven  in bed; playing,  making  love,  giggling,
ordering in Chinese and pizza. Playing more, watching I Love Lucy
reruns,  drinking  champagne,  and making  love.   Miles  bounced
quarters on her taut stomach and cracked eggs on her  exquisitely
tight  derriere. By Sunday morning, Miles found that he  actually
liked Stephanie.  It wasn't that he didn't like his other  women,
he  did.  It was just, well this one was different.  He  'really'
liked her.  A very strange feeling for Miles Foster.

"Miles?" Stephanie asked during another period of blissful after-
glow.  She snuggled up against him closer.

"Yeah?"  He responded by squeezing her buttocks.  His  eyes  were
still closed.

"In  a  minute  stud, yes." She looked up  reassuringly  at  him.
"Miles, would you work for anyone?"  She kissed his chest.

"What  do you mean?" he asked in return.  He wasn't in  the  mood
for shop talk.

"Like, say, a foreigner, not an American company.  Would you work
for them?"

"Huh?"  Miles looked down inquisitively. "Foreigner? I guess  so.
Why do you ask?"  He sounded a tad concerned.

"Oh, no reason." She rubbed him between his legs. "Just  curious.
I thought you were a consultant, and consultants work for  anyone
who can pay.  That's all."

"I am, and I will, but so what?"  He relaxed as Stephanie's hands
got the desired result.

"Well,"  she stroked him rhythmically. "I know some  people  that
could  use you. They're not American, that's all.  I didn't  know
if you cared."

"No, I don't care," he sighed.  "It's all the same to me.  Unless
they're  commies.  My former employer would definitely  frown  on
that."

"Would  you  mind  if I called them, and maybe you  two  can  get
together?" She didn't miss a beat.

"No go ahead, call them, anything you want, but can we talk about
this later?"  Miles begged.

* * * * *

Miles  felt  very  much uninformed on his way  to  the  Baltimore
Washington  Airport.   He knew that he was being flown  to  Tokyo
Japan, first class, by a mystery man who had prepaid him  $10,000
for a 1 hour meeting.  Not a bad start, he thought.  His  reputa-
tion obviously preceded him.  Stephanie was hired to recruit him,
that  was obvious.  And that bothered Miles. He was  being  used.
Wasn't  he?  Or had he seduced her and the trip was a bonus?   He
still  liked  Stephanie, just not as much as  before.   It  never
occurred  to  Miles, not for a second, that Stephanie  might  not
have liked him.

At  JFK  in New York, Miles connected to the 20  hour  flight  to
Tokyo  through  Anchorage, Alaska.  He had a brief  concern  that
this  was  the same route that KAL Flight 007 had taken  in  1983
before  it  was shot down by the Soviets, but he  was  flying  an
American  carrier  with a four digit flight number.   He  allowed
that thought to remove any traces of worry.

The flight was a couple of hours out of New York when one of  the
flight attendants came up to him.  "Mr. Foster?"

"Yes?"  He looked up from the New York City Times he was reading.

"I  believe you dropped this?"  She handed Miles a  large  sealed
envelope. His name had been written across the front with a large
black marker.

"Thank you," said Miles. He took it gratefully.

When  she left, he opened the strange envelope.  It  wasn't  his.
Inside there was a single sheet of paper.  Miles read it.

MR. FOSTER
WELCOME TO JAPAN.

YOU WILL BE MET AT THE NARITA AIRPORT BY MY DRIVER AND CAR.  THEY
ARE AT YOUR DISPOSAL.

WE  WILL MEET IN MY OFFICE AT 8:00 AM, WEDNESDAY,  SEPTEMBER  23.
ALL ARRANGEMENTS HAVE BEEN MADE FOR YOUR PLEASURES.

RESPECTFULLY

TAKI HOMOSOTO

The name meant nothing to him so he forgot about it.  He had more
important things to do.  His membership in the Mile High Club was
in jeopardy.  He had not yet made it with a female flight attend-
ant.

They landed, 18 hours and 1 day later in Tokyo.   Miles was now a
member in good standing.

* * * * *

     Thursday, September 3
     Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport

"DFW, this is American 1137, heading 125 at 3500."

"Roger American 1137, got you loud and green.  Maintain 125, full
circle 40 miles then 215 for 40."

"Traffic Dallas?"

"Heavy.   Weather's been strong.  On again off again.   Piled  up
pretty good."

"Sheers?"

"None so far.  Ah, you're a '37, you carry a sheer monitor.   You
got   it  made.  Have to baby sit some 0's and '27's.  May  be  a
while."

"Roger Dallas.  125 40, 215 40. Maintaining 12 point 5."

"Roger 1137."

The  control  tower at DFW airport was busier than  normal.   The
dozen or so large green radar screens glowed eerily and made  the
air  traffic controllers appear pallid under the  haunting  light
emitted  from  around  the consoles.   Severe  weather  patterns,
afternoon  Texas  thunderstorms  had  intermittently  closed  the
airport  forcing  a  planes to hold in a 120  mile  pattern  over
Dallas and Fort Worth.

Many  of  the tower crew had been at their stations for  2  hours
past their normal quitting time due to street traffic delays  and
highway pileups that had kept shift replacements from arriving on
time.    Planes were late coming in, late departing,  connections
were  being missed.  Tensions were high on the ground and in  the
air by both the airline personnel and travelers alike.  It was  a
chaotic day at Dallas Fort Worth International Airport.

"Chad?  Cm'ere," said Paul Gatwick, the newest and youngest,  and
least burnt out of the day shift flight controllers.

Shift supervisor Chad Phillips came right over.  "What you  got?"
He asked looking at the radar screen.

"See  these three bogies?"  Paul pointed at three spots with  his
finger.

"Bogies?  What are those symbols?"

"They  just  appeared,  out of nowhere.  I  don't  think  they're
there.   And over here," he pointed, "that was Delta  210.   It's
gone."   Paul  spoke calmly, in the professional  manner  he  was
trained. He looked up at Chad, awaiting instructions.

"Mike," Chad said to the controller seated next to Paul.  "Switch
and  copy 14, please.  Fast."  Chad looked over to Mike's  screen
and saw the same pattern.  "Paul, run a level 2 diagnostic.  What
was the Delta pattern?"

"Same as the others, circle.  He's at 45 doing a 90 round."

"Tell him to hold, and verify on board transponder."  Chad  spoke
rapidly and his authority wasn't questioned.

"Mike,  see if we can get any visuals on the bogies.  They  might
be a bounce."

Chad  took charge and, especially in this weather, was  concerned
with  safety first and schedules last.  In less than a minute  he
had  verified that Delta 210 was not on any screen,  three  other
ghost  planes  meandered  through the airspace,  and  that  their
equipment was functioning properly.

"Dallas,"  the calm pilot voice said, "American 1137,  requesting
update.  It's getting a little tight up here."

"Roger,  1137,"  Gatwick  said  nervously.   "Give  me  a  second
here . . ."

"Dallas, what's the problem?"

"Just a check . . ."

Chad immediately told the operator of the ETMS computer to notify
the FAA and Department of Transportation that a potential  situa-
tion     was developing.  The Enhanced Traffic Management  System
was  designed  to  create a complete picture  of  every  airplane
flying within domestic air space.

All  status  information, on every known flight in  progress  and
every commercial plane on the ground,  is transmitted from the 22
ARTCC's, (Air Route Traffic Control Centers) to an FAA  Technical
Center in Atlantic City and then sent by land and satellite to  a
DoT  Systems Center.  There, an array of DEC VAX super mini  com-
puters  process the constant influx of raw data and send back  an
updated map across the ETMS every five minutes.

Chad  zoomed  in on the picture of the country into the  DFW  ap-
proach area and confirmed that the airplanes in question were not
appearing  on  the National Airspace System data fields  or  dis-
plays.  Something was drastically wrong.

"Chad, take a look here!" Another controller urgently called out.

His radar monitor had more bogies than Paul's.  "I lost a  Delta,
too, 1258."

"What is it?"

"37."

"Shit,"  said Chad.  "We gotta get these guys wide, they have  to
know  what's happening."  He called over to  another  controller.
"Get  on  the wire, divert all traffic.  Call  the  boss.   We're
closing  it  down."  The controllers had the power to  close  the
airport,  and direct all flight operations from the tower.   Air-
port  management  wasn't always fond of their autonomy,  but  the
tower's concern was safety at all costs.

"Another one's gone," said Paul.  "That's three 37's gone.   Have
they had a recall lately?"

The ETMS operator asked the computer for a status on 737's  else-
where.   "Chad, we're not the only ones," she said.  "O'Hare  and
LAX have problems, too."

"OK, everybody, listen up," Chad said.  "Stack 'em, pack 'em  and
rack 'em.  Use those outer markers, people.  Tell them to believe
their eyes.  Find the 37's.  Let 'em know their transponders  are
going.  Then, bring 'em down one by one."

The  emergency  speaker  suddenly rang out.  "Shit!  Dive!"   The
captain of American 1137 ordered his plane to accelerate  ground-
ward  for 10 seconds, descending 2500 feet, to avoid  hitting  an
oncoming, and lost, DC-9.

"Dallas,  Mayday, Mayday.  What the fuck's going on  down  there?
This is worse than the freeway . . ."

The emergency procedure was one they had practiced over and over,
but  rarely was it necessary for a full scale test.  The FAA  was
going to be all over DFW and a dozen other airports within hours,
and Chad wanted to be prepared.  He ordered a formal notification
to Boeing that they had identified a potentially serious malfunc-
tion.  Please make your emergency technical support crews  avail-
able immediately.

Of  the 100 plus flights under DFW control all 17 of  the  Boeing
737's  disappeared from the radar screen,  replaced by dozens  of
bogies with meaningless signatures.

"Dallas,  American 1137 requests emergency landing . .  .we  have
several injured passengers who require immediate medical  assist-
ance."

"Roger, 1137," Gatwick blurted back.  "Copy, EP.  Radar status?"

"Nominal," said the shaken American pilot.

"Good.  Runway 21B.  We'll be waiting."

* * * * *

By 5:00 PM, Pacific time, Boeing was notified by airports  across
the country that their 737's were having catastrophic transponder
failure.  Takeoffs were ordered stopped at major airports and the
FAA  directed  that  every 737 be  immediately  grounded.   Chaos
reigned in the airline terminals as delays of several hours to  a
day were announced for most flights.  Police were needed to quell
angry crowds who were stuck thousands of miles from home and were
going  to miss critical business liaisons.  There is  nothing  we
can do, every airline explained to no avail.

Slowly, the planes were brought down, pilots relying on VFR since
they  couldn't  count on any help from the ground.   At  airports
where weather prohibited VFR landings, and the planes had  enough
fuel,  they were redirected to nearby airports.  Nearly  a  dozen
emergency landings in a two hours period set new records that the
FAA  preferred  didn't exist.  A field day for the media,  and  a
certain  decrease  in future passenger activity until  the  shock
wore off.

The  National  Transportation Safety  Board  had  representatives
monitoring the situation within an hour of the first reports from
Dallas,  San Francisco, Atlanta, and Tampa.  When all 737's  were
accounted for,  the individual airports and the FAA lifted flight
restrictions  and left it to the airlines to straighten  out  the
scheduling  mess.  One hundred thousand stranded  passengers  and
almost 30% of the domestic civilian air fleet was grounded.

It was a good thing their reservation computers hadn't gone down.
Damn good thing.

* * * * *

DISASTER IN AIR CREATES PANIC ON GROUND
by Scott Mason

"A  national  tragedy was avoided today by the  quick  and  brave
actions of hundreds of air traffic controllers and pilots working
in harmony," a spokesperson for The Department of  Transportation
said,  commenting  on  yesterday's failure  of  the  computerized
transponder systems in Boeing 737 airplanes.

"In  the interest of safety for all concerned, 737's will not  be
permitted  to  fly commercially until a  full  investigation  has
taken  place." the spokesperson continued.  "That process  should
be complete within 30 days."

In  all, 114 people were sent to hospitals, 29 in serious  condi-
tion,   as a result of injuries sustained while pilots  performed
dangerous gut wrenching maneuvers to avoid mid-air collisions.

Neither Boeing nor the Transportation Safety Board would  comment
on how computer errors could suddenly affect so many airplanes at
once, but some  computer experts have pointed out the possibility
of sabotage.  According to Harold Greenwood, an aeronautic  elec-
tronics  specialist with Air Systems Design in Alpharetta,  Geor-
gia,  "there  is a real and definite possibility that  there  has
been  a  specific attack on the airline  computers.  Probably  by
hackers.   Either that or the most devastating computer  program-
ming error in history."

Government  officials  discounted Greenwood's theories  and  said
there is no place for wild speculation that could create panic in
the  minds of the public.   None the less,  flight  cancellations
busied the phones at most airlines and travel agencies, while the
gargantuan  task  of rescheduling thousands of flights  with  30%
less  planes  began.   Airline officials who didn't  want  to  be
quoted estimated that it would take at least a week to bring  the
system back together,

Airline  fares will increase next Monday by at least 10%  and  as
much as 40% on some routes that will not be restored fully.

The tone of the press conference held at the DoT was one of  both
bitterness and shock as was that of sampled public opinion.

"I think I'll take the train."

"Computers?   They always blame the computers.  Who's  really  at
fault?"


"They're  just  as bad as the oil companies.   Something  goes  a
little wrong and they jack up the prices."

The  National  Transportation  Safety Board said  it  would  also
institute  a  series of preventative maintenance steps  on  other
airplanes' computer systems to insure that such a global  failure
is never repeated.

Major  domestic airlines announced they would try to lease  addi-
tional planes from other countries, but could not guarantee prior
service  performance  for 3 to 6 months.   Preliminary  estimates
place  the  cost of this debacle at between $800 Million  and  $2
Billion if the entire 737 fleet is grounded for only 2 weeks.

The  Stock Market reacted poorly to the news, and  transportation
stocks dove an average of 27% in heavy trading.

The  White  House  issued a brief  statement  congratulating  the
airline industry for its handling of the situation and wished its
best to all inconvenienced and injured travelers.

Class  action suits will be filed next week against the  airlines
and Boeing as a result of the computer malfunction. This is Scott
Mason, riding the train.

* * * * *

"Doug,"  pleaded 39 year old veteran reporter Scott Mason.   "Not
another  computer virus story . . ."   Scott childishly  shrugged
his shoulders in mock defeat.

"Stop your whining," Doug ordered in fun.  "You are the  special-
ist," he chided.

When the story first came across the wire, Scott was the  logical
choice.   In only seven years as a reporter Scott Mason  had  de-
veloped quite a reputation for himself, and for the New York City
Times.   Doug  had had to eat his words from years  earlier  more
times than he cared to remember, but Scott's head had not swelled
to  the size of his fan club, which was the bane of so many  suc-
cessful writers. He knew he was good, just like he had told Doug

"There is nothing sexy about viruses anymore," said Scott  trying
to politely ignore his boss to the point he would just leave.

"Christ  Almighty," the chubby balding sixtyish editor  exploded.
Doug's  periodic exclamatory outbursts at Scott's nonchalance  on
critical issues were legendary.  "The man who puts Cold Fusion on
the  front  page of every paper in the country  doesn't  think  a
virus is sexy enough for the public.  Good night!"

"That's not what I'm saying."  Scott had to defend this one.   "I
finally  got someone to go on the record about the  solar  payoff
scandals between Oil and Congress . . ."

"Then the virus story will give you a little break," kidded Doug.
"You've been working too hard."

"Damn  it, Doug," Scott defied.  "Viruses are a dime a dozen  and
worse,  there's no one behind it, there's nobody there.   There's
no story  . . ."

"Then  find one.  That's what we pay you for."  Doug loudly  mut-
tered  a few choice words that his paper wouldn't be caught  dead
printing.   "Besides, you're the only one left."  As he  left  he
patted Scott on the back saying, "thanks.  Really."

"God, I hate this job."

Scott  Mason loved his job, after all it was his invention  seven
years  ago  when he first pitched it to Doug.   Scott's  original
idea had worked.  Scott Mason alone, under the banner of the  New
York  City Times, virtually pioneered Scientific Journalism as  a
media form in its own right.

Scott  Mason was still its most vocal proponent, just as  he  was
when  he connived his way into a job with the Times, and  without
any journalistic experience.  It was a childhood fantasy.

Doug remembered the day clearly.  "That's a new one on me,"  Doug
had said with amusement when the mildly arrogant but very likable
Mason  had  gotten  cornered him,  somehow  bypassing  personnel.
Points  for aggressiveness, points for creativity and points  for
brass balls.  "What is Scientific Journalism?"

"Scientific Journalism is stripping away all of the long  techni-
cal  terms that science hides behind, and bringing the  facts  to
the people at home."

"We   have   a  quite  adequate  Science  Section,   a   computer
column  . . .and we pick up the big stories."  Doug had tried  to
be polite.

"That's  not what I mean," Scott explained.  "Everybody  and  his
dead  brother can write about the machines and the computers  and
the software.  I'm talking about finding the people, the meaning,
the impact behind the technology."

"No one would be interested," objected Doug.

Doug was wrong.

Scott  Mason immediately acclimated to the modus operandi of  the
news  business  and actually locked onto the collapse  of  Kaypro
Computers and the odd founding family who rode serendipity  until
competence  was  required for survival.   The antics of  the  Kay
family  earned Mason a respectable following in his articles  and
contributions as well as several libel and slander suits from the
Kays.   Trouble was, it's not against the law to print the  truth
or a third party speculations, as long as they're not  malicious.
Scott instinctively knew how to ride the fine edge between  false
accusations and impersonal objectivity.

Cold  Fusion, the brief prayer for immediate, cheap energy  inde-
pendence made headlines, but Scott Mason dug deep and found  that
some  of  the advocates of Cold Fusion had  vested  interests  in
palladium  and iridium mining concerns.  He also  discovered  how
the experiments had been staged well enough to fool most experts.
Scott  had located one expert who wasn't fooled and  could  prove
it.   Scott  Mason rode the crest of the Cold  Fusion  story  for
months before it became old news and the Hubble Telescope  fiasco
took its place.

The  fiasco  of  the Hubble Telescope was nothing  new  to  Scott
Mason's readers.  He had published months before its launch  that
the  mirrors were defective, but the government didn't  heed  the
whistle blower's advice.  The optical measurement computers which
grind  the mirrors of the telescope had a software  program  that
was  never tested before being used on the Hubble.  The  GSA  had
been  tricked by the contractor's test results and Scott  discov-
ered the discrepencies.

When  Gene-Tech  covered  up the accidental  release  of  mutated
spores  into the atmosphere from their genetic engineering  labs,
Scott Mason was the one reporter who had established enough of  a
reputation as both a fair reporter, and also one that  understood
the technology.  Thanks to Mason's early diagnosis and the Times'
responsible publishing, a potentially cataclysmic genetic  disas-
ter was averted.

The  software problems with Star Wars and Brilliant Pebbles,  the
payoffs that allowed defective X-Ray lasers to be shipped to  the
testing ground outside of Las Vegas - Scott Mason was there.   He
traced  the  Libyan chemical weapons plant back to  West  Germany
which triggered the subsequent destruction of the plant.

Scott's  outlook was simple.  "It's a matter of  recognizing  the
possibilities  and then the probabilities.  Therefore,  if  some-
thing  is possible, someone, somewhere will do  it.   Guaranteed.
Since someone's doing it, then it's only a matter of catching him
in the act."

"Besides," he would tell anyone who would listen, "computers  and
technology and electronics represent  trillions of dollars  annu-
ally.   To believe that there isn't interesting,  human  interest
and  profound news to be found, is pure blindness.  The  fear  of
the  unknown, the ignorance of what happens on the other side  of
the buttons we push, is an enemy wrapped in the shrouds of  time,
well disguised and easily avoided."

Scott  successfully opened the wounds of ignorance and  technical
apathy and made he and the Times the de facto standard in  Scien-
tific Journalism.

His reputation as a expert in anything technical endeared him  to
fellow Times' reporters.  Scott often became the technical  back-
bone of articles that did not carry his name.  But that was good.
The journalists' barter system.  Scott Mason was not considered a
competitor to the other reporters because of his areas of  inter-
est  and  the skills he brought with him to the paper.   And,  he
didn't flaunt his knowledge.  To Scott's way of thinking, techni-
cal  fluency  should be as required as are the ABC's, so  it  was
with the dedication of a teacher and the experience of  simplifi-
cation  that Scott undertook it to openly help anyone who  wanted
to learn.  His efforts were deeply appreciated.

****************************************************************

                            Chapter 2
     Friday, September 4
     San Francisco, California

Mr. Henson?"

"Yes, Maggie?"  Henson responded over the hands free phone on his
highly  polished black marble desk.  He never looked up from  the
papers he was perusing.

"There's a John Fullmaster for you."

"Who?" he asked absent mindedly.

"Ah, John Fullmaster."

"I don't know a Fullman do I?  Who is he?"

"That's Fullmaster, sir, and he says its personal."

Robert  Henson, chairman and CEO of Perris, Miller and  Stevenson
leaned  back in the plush leather chair.  A brief perplexed  look
covered  his  face and then a sigh of resignation.   "Very  well,
tell him I'll take it in a minute."

As the young highly visible leader of one of the most  successful
Wall  Street investment banking firms during the merger mania  of
the 1980's, he had grown accustomed to cold calls from aggressive
young  brokers  who wanted a chance to pitch him  on  sure  bets.
Most  often he simply ignored the calls, or referred them to  his
capable and copious staff.  Upon occasion, though, he would amuse
himself with such calls by putting the caller through  salesmen's
hell;  he would permit them to give their pitch,  actually  sound
interested, permit the naive to believe that their call to Robert
Henson would lead them to a pot of gold, then only to bring  them
down  as harshly as he could.  It was the only seeming  diversion
Robert Henson had from the daily grueling regimen of earning  fat
fees  in the most somber of Wall Street activities.  He needed  a
break anyway.

"Robert  Henson.  May I help you?"  He said into the  phone.   It
was  as  much a command as a question.  From the 46th.  floor  SW
corner  office, Henson stared out over Lower New York  Bay  where
the Statue of Liberty reigned.

"Thank  you for taking my call Mr. Henson."  The caller's  proper
Central  London  accent was engaging and conveyed  assurance  and
propriety. "I am calling in reference to the proposed merger  you
are  arranging between Second Boston Financial and Winston  Ellis
Services.   I don't believe that the SEC will be  impressed  with
the  falsified figures you have generated to drive up your  fees.
Don't you agree."

Henson  bolted  upright in his chair and glared into  the  phone.
"Who the hell is this?" he demanded.

"Merely a concerned citizen, sir."  The cheeky caller paused.  "I
asked, sir, don't you agree?"

"Listen,"  Henson shouted into the phone.  I don't know  who  the
hell  you are, nor what you want, but all filings made  with  the
SEC  are public and available to anyone.  Even the press  whom  I
assume you represent . . ."

"I am not with the press Mr. Henson," the voice calmly interrupt-
ed.  "All  the same, I am sure that they would be quite interest-
ed  in  what I have to say.  Or, more precisely, what I  have  to
show them."

"What the hell are you talking about?" Henson screamed.

"Specifically,  you inflated the earnings of Winston  Ellis  over
40%  by burying certain write downs and deferred losses.   I  be-
lieve  you are familiar with the numbers.  Didn't you  have  them
altered yourself?"

Henson  paled  as the caller spoke to him matter of  factly.  His
eyes  darted  around his spacious and opulent  office  as  though
someone  might be listening.  He shifted uneasily  in his  chair,
leaned into the phone and spoke quietly.

"I don't know what you're taking about."

"I think you do, Mr. Henson."

"What do you want?"  Henson asked cautiously.

"Merely  your acknowledgment, to me, right now, that the  figures
were falsified, at your suggestion, and . . ."

"I admit nothing.  Nothing."  Henson hung up the phone.

Shaken,  he dialed the phone, twice.  In his haste  he  misdialed
the first time.  "Get me Brocker. Now. This is Henson."

"Brocker," the other end of the phone responded nonchalantly.

"Bill, Bob here.  We got troubles."

* * * * *

"Senator  Rickfield?   I think you better take this  call."   Ken
Boyers was earnest in his suggestion.  The aged Senator looked up
and  recognized a certain urgency.  The youthful 50 year old  Ken
Boyers  had  been with Senator Merrill Rickfield  since  the  mid
1960's  as an aide de campe, a permanent fixture  in  Rickfield's
national  success.  Ken preferred the number two spot, to be  the
man  in  the background rather the one in the public  light.   He
felt he could more effectively wield power  without the  constant
surveillance  of  the  press.  Only when events  and  deals  were
completely  orchestrated were they made public, and then  Merrill
could take the  credit. The arrangement suited them both.

Rickfield  indicated that his secretary and the two  junior  aids
should leave the room.  "What is it Ken?"

"Just take the call, listen carefully, and then we'll talk."

"Who is  it, Ken. I don't talk to every. . ."

"Merrill  .  . .pick up the phone." It was an  order.   They  had
worked together long enough to afford Ken the luxury of  ordering
a U.S. Senator around.

"This  is  Senator Rickfield, may I help  you?"   The  solicitous
campaign voice, smiling and inviting,  disguised the puzzled look
he  gave  his senior aide.  Within a few seconds  the  puzzlement
gave  way  to open mouthed silent shock and  then,  only  moments
later  to  overt fear.  He stared with disbelief at  Ken  Boyers.
Aghast, he gently put the phone back in its cradle.

"Ken," Rickfield haltingly spoke. "Who the hell was that and  how
in  blazes did he know about the deal with Credite Suisse?   Only
you, me and General Young knew."  He rose slowly rose and  looked
accusingly at Ken.

"C'mon Merrill, I have as much to lose as you."

"The  hell  you do."  He was growling. "I'm  a  respected  United
States  Senator.  They can string me up from the highest  yardarm
just  like they did Nixon and I'm not playing to lose.   Besides,
I'm the one the public knows while you're invisible. It's my  ass
and  you know it.  Now, and I mean now, tell me what the hell  is
going on?  There were only three of us . . ."

"And  the bank," Ken quickly interjected to deflect   the  verbal
onslaught.

"Screw the bank.  They use numbers.  Numbers, Ken.  That was  the
plan.   But this son  of a bitch knew the numbers.  Damn  it,  he
knew the numbers Ken!"

"Merrill, calm down."

"Calm down?  You have some nerve to tell me to calm down.  Do you
know  what  would happen if anyone, and I mean anyone  finds  out
about  .  .  ."  Rickfield looked around and  thought  better  of
finishing the sentence.

"Yes I know.  As well as you do.  Jesus Christ, I helped set  the
whole thing up.  Remember?"  He approached Merrill Rickfield  and
touched  the Senator's shoulder. "Maybe it's a hoax?   Just  some
lucky guess by some scum bag who . . ."

"Bullshit." The senator turned abruptly.  "I want a tee off  time
as  soon  as  possible.  Even sooner.  And make  damn  sure  that
bastard Young is there.  Alone.  It's a threesome."

* * * * *

John  Faulkner was lazing at his estate  in the eminently  exclu-
sive, obscenely expensive Bell Canyon, twenty miles north of  Los
Angeles.   Even though it was Monday, he just wasn't up to  going
into   the  office.  As Executive Vice  President  of  California
National Bank, with over twenty billion in assets, he could  pick
and choose his hours.  This Tuesday he chose  to read by the pool
and  enjoy the warm and clear September California  morning.  The
view  of  the San Gabriel mountains was so distracting  that  his
normal thirty minute scan of the Wall Street Journal took  nearly
two hours.

His estate was the one place where Faulkner was guaranteed priva-
cy  and anonymity.  High profile Los Angeles banking  required  a
social  presence and his face, along with his wife's, graced  the
social  pages  every  time an event of any  gossip-magnitude  oc-
curred.  He craved his private time.

Faulkner's  standing instruction with his secretary was never  to
call  him  at home unless "the bank is nuked, or  I  die"   which
when translated meant, "Don't call me, I'll call you."  His  wife
was  the  only  other person with the  private  phone  number  he
changed every month to insure his solitude.

The  phone rang.  It never rang.  At least not in recent  memory.
He  used it to dial out; but it was never used to receive  calls.
The  warble  surprised him so, that he let it  ring  three  times
before suspiciously picking it up.  Damn  it, he thought.  I just
got a new number last week. I'll have to  have it changed again.

"Hello?" he asked suspiciously.

"Good  morning Mr. Faulkner. I just called to let you  know  that
your  secret is safe with me."  Faulkner itched to  identify  the
voice behind the well educated British accent, but that  fleeting
thought dissipated at the import of the words being spoken.

"Who  is this? What secret?"

"Oh,  dear me. I am sorry, where are my manners.  I am  referring
to  the millions you have embezzled from your own bank  to  cover
your  gambling  losses last  year.  Don't worry. I won't  tell  a
soul."  The line went dead.

Sir George dialed the next number on his list after scanning  the
profile.   The phone was answered by a timid sounding  gentleman.
Sir George began his fourth pitch of the day.  "Mr. Hugh Sidneys?
I would like to talk to you about a small banking problem I think
you have . . ."

Sir  George  Sterling made another thirty four  calls  that  day.
Each  one alarmingly similar to the first three.  Not  that  they
alarmed him.  They merely alarmed, often severely, the recipients
of his calls.  In most cases he had never heard of the persons he
was calling, and the contents of his messages were often  cryptic
to  him.  But it didn't take him long to realize that every  call
was  some form of veiled, or not so veiled threat.  But  his  in-
structions  had been clear.  Do not threaten.  Just pass  on  the
contents of the messages on his list to their designees.  Do  not
leave  any  message unless he had confirmed, to the best  of  his
ability  that he was actually speaking to the party in  question.
If  he received any trouble in reaching his intended targets,  by
secretaries  or aides, he was only to pass on a preliminary  mes-
sage.   These were especially cryptic, but in all cases,  perhaps
with a little prod, his call was put through.

At  the end of the first day of his assignment, Sir George  Ster-
ling  walked onto his balcony overlooking San Francisco  Bay  and
reflected on his good fortune.  If he hadn't been stuck in Athens
last  year, wondering where his next score would come from.   How
strange the world works, he thought.  Damn lucky he became a Sir,
and at the tender age of twenty nine at that.

His  title,  actually purchased from The  Royal  Title  Assurance
Company,  Ltd. in London in 1987 for a mere 5000 pounds had  per-
mitted George Toft to leave the perennial industrial smog of  the
eternally drizzly commonness of Manchester, England and assume  a
new  identity.   It  was one of the few ways out  of  the  dismal
existence that generations before him had tolerated with a  stiff
upper  lip.    As a petty thief he had done  'awright',  but  one
score had left him with more money than he had ever seen. That is
when he became a Sir, albeit one purchased.

He spent several months impressing mostly himself as he  traveled
Europe.  With the help of Eliza Doolittle,  Sir George  perfected
his  adapted upper crust London accent.  His natural  speech  was
that  of  a Liverpuddlian with a bag of marbles in  his  mouth  -
totally unintelligible when drunk.  But his royal speech was  now
that  of a Gentleman from the House of Lords.  Slow  and  precise
when  appropriate  or a practiced articulateness   when  speaking
rapidly.  It initially took some effort, but he could now correct
his  slips instantly. No one noticed anymore.  Second  nature  it
became for George Sterling, n<130> Toft.

Athens was the end of his tour and where he had spent the last of
his  money.  George, Sir George, sat sipping Metaxa  in  Sintigma
Square  next to the Royal Gardens and the imposing  Hotel  Grande
Britagne  styled  in nineteenth century rococo  elegance.  As  he
enjoyed the balmy spring Athens evening pondering his next  move,
as  either  George Toft of Sir George Sterling,  a  well  dressed
gentleman sat down at his tiny wrought iron table.

"Sir George?"  The visitor offered his hand.

George  extended  his hand, not yet aware that his guest  had  no
reason whatsoever to know who he was.

"Sir  George?  Do I have the Sir George Sterling  of  Briarshire,
Essex?"   The accent was trans European.  Internationally  cosmo-
politan.   German? Dutch? It didn't matter, Sir George  had  been
recognized.

George  rose  slightly.  "Yes, yes. Of course. Excuse me,  I  was
lost  in  thought, you know.  Sir George  Sterling.   Of  course.
Please do be seated."

The  stranger said, "Sir George, would you be offended if  I  of-
fered  you another drink, and perhaps took a few minutes of  your
valuable time?"  The man smiled genuinely and sat himself  across
from George before any reply.  He knew what the answer would be.

"Please  be seated.  Metaxa would it be for you, sir?"   The  man
nodded  yes.  "Garcon?"  George waved two fingers at one  of  the
white-jacketed waiters who worked in the outdoor cafe.   "Metaxa,
parakalo!"   Greek waiters are not known for their  graciousness,
so  a  brief grunt and nod was an  acceptable  response.   George
returned his attention to his nocturnal visitor. "I don't believe
I've had the pleasure . . ." he said in his most formal voice.

"Sir George, please just call me Alex.  Last names, are so, well,
so unnecessary among men like us. Don't you agree?"

George nodded assent.  "Yes, quite. Alex then, it is.  How may  I
assist you?"

"Oh  no,  Sir George, it is I who may be able to assist  you.   I
understand  that you would like to continue your, shall  we  say,
extended  sabbatical.   Would  that be a  fair  appraisal?"   The
Metaxas arrived and Alex excused the waiter with two 1000 Drachma
notes.  The overtipping guaranteed privacy.

George looked closely at Alex. Very well dressed.  A Saville  was
it? Perhaps.  Maybe Lubenstrasse.  He didn't care. This  stranger
had either keen insight into George's current plight or had heard
of  his escapades across the Southern Mediterranean.  Royalty  on
Sabbatical was an unaccostable lie that regularly passed critical
scrutiny.

"Fair.  Yes sir, quite fair.  What exactly can you do for me,  or
can we do for each other?"

"An  even  more accurate portrayal my friend, yes,  do  for  each
other."  Alex paused for effect and to sip his  Metaxa.   "Simply
put  Sir George, I have the need for a well spoken  gentleman  to
represent me for a period of perhaps, three months, perhaps  more
if all goes well.  Would that fit into your schedule?"

"I  see no reason that  I mightn't be able to, take a  sabbatical
from  my  sabbatical  if  .  .  .well  now,  how  should   I  put
this . . ."

" . . .that you are adequately compensated to take time away from
your valuable projects?"

"Yes,  yes  quite  so.  Not that I am ordinarily  for  hire,  you
understand,   it's  just  that . . .".  Alex  detected  a  slight
stutter as Sir George spoke.

Alex held up both hands in a gesture of understanding.   "No need
to  continue my dear Sir George.  I do thoroughly  recognize  the
exorbitant  costs  associated  with your studies  and  would  not
expect your efforts, on my behalf of course, to go unrewarded."

George  Toft was negotiating with a man he had never met,  for  a
task as yet unstated.  The only reason he didn't feel the discom-
fort  that  one  should in such a situation is that  he  was   in
desperate need of money.  And, this stranger did seem to know who
he was, and did need his particular type  of expertise,  whatever
that was.

"What exactly do you require of me, Alex.  That is, what form  of
representation have you in mind?"  He might as well find out what
he was  supposed to do before naming a price.

Alex  laughed. "Merely to be my voice.  It is so simple,  really.
In  exchange for that, and some travel, first class and  all  ex-
penses to which you are accustomed, you will be handsomely paid."
Alex  looked for Sir George's reaction to the proposed  fees.  He
was pleased with what he saw in George's face.

  Crikey, this is too good to be true.  What's the  catch<D>.
As George ruminated his good fortune and the Metaxa, Alex contin-
ued.

"The  job  is  quite simple, really, but  requires  a  particular
delicacy  with which you are well acquainted. Each day  you  will
receive  a list of names.  There will be instructions  with  each
name.  Call them at the numbers provided. Say only what is  writ-
ten.   Keep  notes of each call you make and I will  provide  you
with the means to transmit them to me in the strictest of  confi-
dence. You and I will have no further personal contact, either if
you  accept or do not accept my proposition.  If we are  able  to
reach  mutually agreeable terms, monies will be wired to  a  bank
account in your name."  Alex opened his jacket and handed  George
an  envelop.   "This is an advance if you accept. It  is  $25,000
American.  There is a phone number to call when you arrive in San
Francisco.  Follow  the instructions explicitly.  If you do  not,
there  will be no lists for you, no additional monies and I  will
want  this  money  back.  Any questions Sir  George?"   Alex  was
smiling warmly but as serious as a heart attack.

Alex  scanned  the contents of the envelope.   America.   He  had
always wanted to see the States.

"Yes,  Alex,  I do have one question.  Is  this  legal?"   George
peered at Alex for a clue.

"Do you really care?"

"No."

"Off you go then.  And good luck."

* * * * *

Sir George Sterling arrived in San Francisco airport the  follow-
ing evening.  He flew first class and impressed returning  Ameri-
can tourists with his invented pedigree and his construed  impor-
tance.  What fun.  After the virtually nonexistent customs check,
he  called  the number inside the envelop.  It rang  three  times
before answering.  Damn, it was a machine, he thought.

"Welcome to the United States, Sir George.  I hope you had a good
flight."  The  voice was American, female, and  flight  attendant
friendly.   "Please check into the San Francisco Airport  Hilton.
You will receive a call at 11 AM tomorrow.  Good night."   A dial
tone replaced the lovely voice.  He dialed the number again.

A mechanical voice responded instead. "The number you have called
in  no  longer in service. Please check the number  or  call  the
operator for assistance.  The number you have called is no longer
in service..."

George dialed the number twice more before he gave up in frustra-
tion. He had over $20,000 in cash, knew no one in America and for
the  first time in years, he felt abandoned.  What kind  of  joke
was  this?  Fly half way around the world and be greeted with  an
out  of service number.  But the first voice had known his  name.
The Hilton.  Why not?

At precisely 11AM, the phone in Sir George Sterling's suite rang.
He was still somewhat jet lagged from his 18 hours of flying  and
the span of 10 time zones.  The Eggs Benedict was exquisite,  but
Americans could learn something about tea.  The phone rang again.
He casually picked it up.

"Good  morning, Sir George.  Please get a pencil and paper.   You
have fifteen seconds and then I will continue."  It was the  same
alluring voice from yesterday. The paper and pen were right there
at  the phone so he waited through 14 seconds of  silence.  "Very
good. Please check out of the hotel and pay cash.  Proceed to the
San Francisco airport and from a pay phone, call 5-5-5-3-4-5-6 at
1 P.M.  Have a note book and two pens  with you.  Good Bye. "

The annoying dial tone returned.   What a bloody waste  of time.

At  1P.M. he called the number as he was instructed.  He  figured
that  since he was to have a notebook and pens he might  need  to
write for  a while, so he used one of the phone booths that  pro-
vides a seat and large writing surface.

"Good  afternoon Sir George.  In ten seconds,  your  instructions
will  begin."   Again, that same voice, but  it  almost  appeared
condescending  to  him now.  Isn't that the way  when  you  can't
respond.   The  voice continued.  "Catch the next flight  to  New
York  City.  Stay at the Grand Hyatt Hotel at Grand Central  Sta-
tion on 42nd. Street and Park Avenue.  Not a suite this time, Sir
George, just a regular room."   Sir George was startled at Alex's
attention to detail.

"You  will  stay there for fourteen days.  On  56th.  street  and
Madison  avenue is a school called CTI, Computer Training  Insti-
tute.  You are to go to CTI and enroll in the following  classes:
DOS,  that's D-O-S for beginners, Intermediate DOS  and  Advanced
DOS.  You will also take WordPerfect I and II.  Lastly, and  most
importantly  you will take all three classes  on  Tele-Communica-
tions.  They call it TC-I,  TC-II and TC-III.  These eight class-
es will  take you ten days to complete.  Do not forget to pay  in
cash. I will now pause for ten seconds."  Alex was writing  furi-
ously.  Computers?  He was scared silly of them.  Not that he had
ever  had the opportunity or the need or the desire to use  them,
just  from lack of exposure and the corresponding ignorance.  But
if this meant he could keep the $25,000 he would do it.  What the
hell.

"After  you enroll, go to 45 West 47th street to a  store  called
Discount Computer Shoppe.  Buy the following equipment with cash.
One Pro-Start 486-80 computer with 8 Meg  RAM.  That's 8 M-E-G R-
A-M and ask for a high resolution color monitor.  Also  purchase,
and  have them install a high speed modem, M-O-D-E-M.  Do not,  I
repeat,  do not purchase a printer of any type.  No printers  Sir
George.   You are never to use a printer. Ever. Lastly, you  will
purchase  a copy of Word Perfect and Crosstalk.  If you wish  any
games  for  your  amusement, that is up to you.   When  you  have
completed  your studies you will call 212-555-6091.  Do not  call
that  number  before  you have completed your  studies.  This  is
imperative."

Sir  George  was just writing, not comprehending a thing. It  was
all gibberish to him.  Pure gibberish.

"Sir George."  The female voice got serious, very serious for the
first time in their relationship. "You are to speak to no one,  I
repeat,  no  one, of the nature of your business, the  manner  in
which 