The Project Gutenberg eBook of American Hand Book of the Daguerreotype
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: American Hand Book of the Daguerreotype

Author: S. D. Humphrey


        
Release date: September 1, 1994 [eBook #167]
                Most recently updated: July 3, 2020

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/167

Credits: Produced by Gregory Walker, for the Digital Daguerreian Archive Project.


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AMERICAN HAND BOOK OF THE DAGUERREOTYPE ***




Produced by Gregory Walker, for the Digital Daguerreian Archive Project.

[Illustration]

This etext was created by Gregory Walker, Austin, Texas, for the
Digital Daguerreian Archive Project.
 Page numbers explicitly referred to in the text are marked at their
 beginning by “[page ##]” on a separate line. I hope this etext
 inspires a wider interest in the origins of photography and in the
 modern practice of the Daguerreian Art.

[Updater’s note: In this version, the above page numbering convention
has been replaced by “{##}” sequences placed in line with the
surrounding text.]

AMERICAN HAND BOOK OF THE DAGUERREOTYPE

GIVING THE MOST APPROVED AND CONVENIENT METHODS FOR PREPARING THE
CHEMICALS, AND THE COMBINATIONS USED IN THE ART.

CONTAINING THE DAGUERREOTYPE, ELECTROTYPE, AND VARIOUS OTHER PROCESSES
EMPLOYED IN TAKING HELIOGRAPHIC IMPRESSIONS.

BY S. D. HUMPHREY

FIFTH EDITION

NEW YORK: PUBLISHED BY S. D. HUMPHREY 37 LISPENARD STREET
 1858

Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1858, by S. D.
HUMPHREY, In the Clerk’s Office of the District Court of the Southern
District of New York.

To J. GURNEY, WHOSE PROFESSIONAL SKILL, SCIENTIFIC ACCURACY, AND
ENERGETIC PERSEVERANCE, HAVE WON FOR HIM UNIVERSAL ESTEEM, THIS WORK IS
MOST RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED.




PREFACE.


There is not an Amateur or practical Daguerreotypist, who has not felt
the want of a manual—Hand Book, giving concise and reliable information
for the processes, and preparations of the Agents employed in his
practice.

Since portraits by the Daguerreotype are at this time believed to be
more durable than any other style of “Sun-drawing,” the author has hit
upon the present as being an appropriate time for the introduction of
the Fifth Edition of this work. The earlier edition having a long since
been wholly; exhausted, the one now before you is presented.

The endeavor has been to point out the readiest and most approved
Methods of Operation, and condense in its pages; as much practical
information as its limits will admit. An extended Preface is
unnecessary, since the aim and scope of this work are sufficiently
indicated by the title.

S. D. HUMPHREY NEW YORK, 1858.




CONTENTS


CHAPTER I.

Polishing the Daguerreotype Plate—Buffing the Plate—Coating the
Plate—Exposure of the Plate in the Camera—Position Developing the
Daguerreotype—Exposure to Mercury—Removing the Coating—Gilding or
fixing the Image—Coloring Daguerreotype, . . . . . 18

CHAPTER II.

Coloring Back Grounds—Transparent ditto—Gilding Dissolvent—Solution for
removing Specks—Solarized Impression—To Purify Water—Cleaning
Mercury—Adhesive Paper—Black Stain for Apparatus—Sealing Wax for
Bottles—Rouge—Rotten Stone—Potassa Solution—Hyposulphite
Solution—Substitute for do.—Gilding Solution—Solution for increasing
the Brilliancy of the Daguerreotype—Bleaching Solution;—Cold
Gilding—Neutralizing Agents—Buff Dryer—Keeping Buffs in order—Cleaning
Buckskins—Reflector for taking Views, . . . . 52

CHAPTER III.

Bromine and its Compounds—Iodine and its Compounds—Chlorine and its
Compounds—Cyanide of Potassium—Hyposulphite of Soda—Hyphosulphite of
Gold—Nitric Acid—Nitro-Muriatic Acid—Hydrochloric Acid—Hydrofluoric
Acid—Sulphuric Acid—Accelerating Substances—Liquid Sensitives—Dry
Sensitives, etc., etc., . . . . . 72

CHAPTER IV.

Light—Optics—Solar Spectrum—Decomposition of Light—Light, Heat, and
Actinism—Blue Paper and Color for the Walls of the Operating
Room—Proportions of Light, Heat and Actinism composing a
Sunbeam—Refraction—Reflection—Lenses—Copying Spherical
Aberration—Chromatic Aberration, . . . 131

CHAPTER V.

To make Plates for the Daguerreotype—Determining the Time of Exposure
in the Camera—Instantaneous Process for Producing
Daguerreotype—Galvanizing the Daguerreotype Plate—Silvering
Solution—Daguerreotype without Mercury—Management of Chemicals—Hints
and Cautions—Electrotyping—Crayon Daguerreotypes—Illuminated
Daguerreotypes—Natural Colors in Heliography—Multiplying Daguerreotypes
on one Plate—Deposit in Gilding—Practical Hints on the Daguerreotype, .
. . 149

CHAPTER VI.

An Account of Wolcott and Johnson’s Early experiments in the
Daguerreotype, . . . 188




AMERICAN HAND-BOOK of THE DAGUERREOTYPE.




CHAPTER I.


Polishing the Daguerreotype Plate—Buffing the Plate—Coating the
Plate—Exposure of the Plate in the Camera—Position—Developing the
Daguerreotype—Exposure to Mercury—Removing the Coating—Gilding or
fixing the Image—Coloring Daguerreotype.

Polishing the Daguerreotype Plate.—I shall endeavor to present to the
reader the process I have found productive of good and satisfactory
results, presenting the same in a clear and concise manner, so that any
one, by following the various manipulations given, will be enabled to
succeed. If there is any one part of the process in Daguerreotype in
which operators fail more than all others, it is in not properly
preparing the plate. It has truly been said that it would take a volume
to describe all the methods that have been suggested for polishing the
plate.

I shall confine myself to the following description, which has been
successfully practised, also most generally adopted by our operators,
and I believe equal, if not superior to any other method, yet at the
same time it is not of so much importance what particular method is
employed, so that it be thoroughly and skillfully carried out.

There is a general tendency with beginners to slight this operation;
hence the necessity of adopting a system which precludes the
possibility of doing so. During many years’ study and practice in the
art, I have tried numerous methods and substances for the better
accomplishment of the end in view, and have finally settled upon the
following, as being (so far as experience allows me to Judge) the modus
operandi, best suited to all circumstances; under no condition would I
approve of a method less rigorous or precise.

The operator being provided with a bottle of finely prepared rotten
stone, cover the mouth of the bottle with a piece of thick paper, this
perforated with a pin so that the rotten stone can be dusted on the
plate. Fasten the plate on the holder, take the rotten stone (Becker’s
can always be depended upon), and dust on lightly until the surface is
freely covered; now drop on the plate’s surface a few drops of an
alcoholic solution.[1]

 [1] This solution is composed of equal parts of alcohol and water, for
 the summer, and in winter three parts alcohol to one of water; a few
 drops of potassa solution may be added, and is known to have a decided
 effect upon the plate.

Take a patch of Canton flannel; in order to prevent the moisture from
the hand it should have a thick, firm texture: with this rub the plate
in circles across, then back covering one-half of the former row of
circles in each crossing until you have gone over the plate and back to
the point of beginning, occupying at least half a minute in the
operation, for a small plate, and so in proportion for the other sizes.

Care should be observed to keep the patch wet with the alcoholic
solution forming a paste on the surface of the plate; the motion of the
hand should be brisk and free, not hurried, and the pressure about
equal to that of a pound weight. When the cotton is disposed to adhere
to the plate, and slip from under the finger, spread the fore and
middle fingers a little apart, then pressing down, bring them together
in such a manner as to form a fold in the cloth between them, by which
means you will hold it perfectly secure.

Avoid wetting the fingers, and should they perspire, wipe them often,
as the moisture penetrating the cotton and coming in contact with the
plate, would cause streaks it would be difficult to remove. I will here
remark that many operators use much more cotton flannel than there is
need of. I have found in my experience that a single patch, about one
and half inch square, will be better for cleaning a number of plates
than a new piece for every plate. This is the case for the wet, and for
the dryrubbing two or three pieces will be found to answer. Thus with
four or five cloths a dozen plates may be prepared.

Some operators use prepared cotton, and think it more convenient than
the flannel. This may be had prepared free from seeds and in a very
perfect state, if wished.

In going over the plate, great care should be observed, in touching its
surface as equally as possible. The greatest care should be taken
neither to touch the plate with the fingers, nor that part of the
cotton flannel which is to come in contact with its surface; take a
clean piece of flannel by one corner, snap it smartly to free it from
dust and loose fibres, lay it face-side upward, dust on a little fine
rotten stone; with this, polish around, or across, or in circles,
lightly and briskly, passing gradually over the whole surface of the
plate, as was done before with the wet. The plate should now exhibit a
bright, clear, uniform surface, with a strong metallic lustre,
perfectly free from any appearance of film; if not, the last polished
should be continued until the effect is obtained, and when once
obtained, the plate is ready for buffing.

Buffing the Plate.—There are a variety of ways and means employed in
this part of the operation. Some choose wheels, and others prefer the
ordinary hand-buff. I have been unable to detect any peculiar advantage
in the use of the wheel except in the facility of the operation; no
doubt, however, but there is a saving of time, particularly in the
preparation of the larger plates. For general use, we have not seen a
wheel better adapted for this purpose than the one patented by Messrs.
Lewis.

It is generally well to use a hand-buff before placing the plate on the
wheel; this is in order to prevent, as far as possible, the dust or
other substance that may be on the surface of the plate from coming in
contact with the cover of the wheel. I will here follow out the use of
the hand-buffs (two are necessary) as they are mostly used.

In the morning, before using the buffs, brush both as clean as
possible, in order to free them from dust; then with the blade of a
pair of shears, held perpendicular, rub the buffs from end to end; then
knock them both together in order to free them from all dust or other
substances, occasionally exposing them to the sun or to the fire.

With one of the buffs (reserving the finest and softest for the last
operation), powder its face with fine rouge and brush off slightly,
leaving only the finest particles in it. Every operator should have two
plate-holders; one for cleaning and one for buffing the plate; for when
using only one, the rotten stone is liable to get on the buff and
scratch the plate.

Rest the fingers of the left hand on the back of the buff, near the
farther end, with about the same pressure as in cleaning, while with
the right you bear on the handle to correspond, and give the buff a
free, easy, horizontal motion, passing it very nearly the whole length
over the plate each time. Continue this operation in such a manner that
the plate will on all parts of its surface have received an equal
amount of polish. This buff once well filled with polish, add but
little after, say a small quantity once in two or three plates. The
polish as well as the buffs must be kept perfectly dry.

The second buff should always be in the best order, and if this is the
case, but little polish after the first need be used. Much depends upon
the last finish of the surface of the plate, and as a fine impression
is desired in the same ratio, the operator must exercise care and skill
in this operation. Some buff the smaller plates on the hands, by
resting them on the fingers in such a manner that the buff cannot touch
them; some by holding the edges with thumb and little finger, with the
remaining fingers under, or on the back; and others buff on the holder.
When this last method is adopted, it requires the greatest caution to
prevent the dust from getting on the buff. The holder should be wiped
clean.

The plate frequently slips off or around, and the buff comes in contact
with the bed of the holder. When, however, the operator is so
unfortunate as to meet with this mishap, the utmost care must be
observed in thoroughly cleaning the buff cover before further buffing.
In this last buffing it may be continued as before, except without the
application of polish powder to the last buff. Examine the surface
occasionally, and buff more lightly towards the close of the operation,
using at last the mere weight of the buff. This last buffing should
occupy as long a time as the first.

The point to be aimed at is, the production of a surface of such
exquisite polish as to be itself invisible, like the surface of a
mirror. The secret of producing pictures discernible in any light, lies
in this: the more dark, deep and mirror-like the surface of the plate,
the more nearly do we approach to perfection.

In all cases, very light and long continued buffing is productive of
the greater success, since by that means a more perfect polish can be
obtained.

The question is often asked, why is it that the plates receive the
coating so unevenly? I will answer by saying that it may arise from two
causes: the first and most general cause is that those parts of the
plate’s surface which will receive the heaviest coating have been more
thoroughly polished, and the consequence is that it is more sensitive
to the chemical operation; second, and might perhaps be considered a
part of the first, the heat of the plate may not be equal in all its
parts; this may arise from the heat caused by the friction in buffing.
It is a well known fact, with which every observing practitioner is
familiar, that a silver plate at a temperature of 45 deg. or less,
exposed to the vapors of iodine, is less sensitive and takes a longer
time to coat, than when it is at a temperature of 60 deg. or more.

Whenever a view is to be taken, or any impression which requires the
plate to be turned on the side, it should be buffed in the other
direction, so that the marks will always be horizontal, when the
picture is in position. With the finest possible polish, the plate is
ready for the coating box.

The question is often asked by operators, what is the state of the
plate when polished and allowed to stand for a time before using? To
meet this point we hare only to consider the silver and the power
acting upon it. Pure atmosphere does not act upon silver; but we do not
have this about in our operating rooms, as it is more or less charged
with sulphurated hydrogen, which soon tarnishes the surface of the
plate with a film of brown sulphurate. It is this that sometimes causes
the specks which appear on finishing the impression, and are a great
annoyance. Hence we see that the plate should be buffed just before
receiving the vapor of iodine. Mr Hunt gives his opinion of the use of
diluted nitric acid as the best solution for freeing, the surface of
the plate; he says:

“Numerous experiments on plated copper, pure silver plates, and on
silvered glass and paper, have convinced me that the first operation of
polishing with nitric acid, etc., is essential to the production of the
most sensitive surface. All who will take the trouble to examine the
subject, will soon be convinced that the acid softens the silver,
bringing it to a state in which it is extremely susceptible of being
either oxydized or iodized, according as the circumstances may occur of
its exposure to the atmosphere or the iodine.”

I cannot see the objection to this solution; not, however, in general
use. Our operators do not find it of sufficient importance to the
success of their pictures to accept it, the alcoholic solution being in
its nature less objectionable.

I will say here, that a plate submitted to only an ordinary polish is
found to contain numberless minute particles of the powder made use of.
Should the same plate be buffed for a long time, the polish will nearly
all disappear, leaving the cavities in the surface free for the action
of agents employed in subsequent operation. For this reason, I find
that great amount of polishing powder should not be applied to the last
buff, and it is obvious that three buffs can be employed to adventure;
the two last should not receive any polishing materials. I have
examined a plate that was considered to possess a fine finish, and
similar had produced good impressions; these same plates, when
subjected to a long and light buffing, would present a surface no finer
in appearance to the naked eye; but upon exposure to the solar
radiation, would produce a well-defined image in one fourth less time
than the plate without the extra buffing.

Coating the Plate.—For this purpose our mechanics and artists have
provided a simple apparatus called a coating-box, which is so arranged
as to be perfectly tight, retaining the vapor of the iodine or
accelerators, and at the same time allowing, by means of a slide, the
exposure of the plate to these vapors. They can readily be obtained by
application to any dealer, all of whom can furnish them.

The principal difficulty in coating the plate, is that of preserving
the exact proportion between the quantity of iodine and bromine, or
quick. It is here necessary to say, that hardly any two persons see
alike the same degree of color, so as to be enabled to judge correctly
the exact tint, i. e. what one might describe as light rose red, might
appear to another as bright or cherry red; consequently, the only rule
for the student in Daguerreotype, is to study what appears to him to be
the particular tint or shade required to aid him to produce the desired
result. Practise has proved that but a slight variation in the chemical
coating, of the Daguerreotype plate will very materially affect the
final result.

The operator will proportion the coating of iodine and bromine or
accelerators according to the strength and composition of the latter.

Experience proves that the common impressions, iodized to a rather
light yellow gold tint, and brought by the bromine to a very light,
rose color, have their whites very intense, and their deep shades very
black. It is also known that if you employ a thicker coating of iodine
and apply upon it a proportionate tint of bromine, so as to obtain a
deep rose tint, delineations will be less marked, and the image have a
softer tone. This effect has been obvious to everyone who has practised
the art. Thus I may observe that the light coatings produce strong
contrast of light and shade, and that this contrast grows gradually
less, until in the very heavy coating it almost wholly disappears. From
this it will readily be perceived that the middle shades are the ones
to be desired for representing the harmonious blending of the lights
and shades.

Then, if we examine, with respect to strength, or depth of tone, and
sharpness of impression, we see that the light coating, produces a very
sharp but shallow impression; while the other extreme gives a deep but
very dull one. Here, then, are still better reasons for avoiding either
extreme. The changes through which the plate passes in coating may be
considered a yellow straw color or dark orange yellow, a rose color
more or less dark in tint, or red violet, steel blue or indigo, and
lastly green. After attaining this latter color, the plate resumes a
light yellow tint, and continues to pass successively a second time,
with very few exceptions, through all the shades above mentioned.

I will here present some excellent remarks upon this subject by Mr.
Finley. This gentleman says:

“It is well known to all who have given much attention to the subject,
that an excess of iodine gives the light portions of objects with
peculiar strength and clearness, while the darker parts are retarded,
as it were, and not brought out by that length of exposure which
suffices for the former. Hence, statuary, monuments, and all objects of
like character, were remarkably well delineated by the original process
of Daguerre; the plate being coated with iodine alone. An excess of
bromine, to a certain degree, has the opposite effect; the white
portions of the impression appearing of a dull, leaden hue, while those
which should be black, or dark, appear quite light. This being the
case, I conclude there must be a point between the two extremes where
light and dark objects will be in photogenic equilibrium. The great
object, therefore, is to maintain, as nearly as possible, a perfect
balance between the two elements entering into union to form the
sensitive coating of the plate, in order that the lights and shades be
truly and faithfully represented, and that all objects, whether light
or dark, be made to appear so far conformable to nature, as is
consistent with the difference in the photogenic energy of the
different colored rays of light. It is this nicely-balanced combination
which ensures, in the highest degree, a union of the essential
qualities of a fine Daguerreotype, viz., clearness and strength, with
softness and purity of tone.

“So far as I know, it is the universal practice of operators to judge
of the proportion of iodine and bromine in coating the plate, by two
standards of color the one fixed upon for the iodine, the other for the
additional coating of bromine. Now I maintain that these alone form a
very fallacious standard; first, because the color appears to the eye
either lighter or darker, according as there is more or less light by
which we inspect the coating; and secondly, because if it occur that we
are deceived in obtaining the exact tint for the first coating, we are
worse misled in obtaining the second, for if the iodine coating be too
light, then an undue proportion of bromine is used in order to bring it
to the second standard, and vice versa.”

The iodine box should be kept clean and dry. The plate immediately
after the last buffing, should be placed over the iodine, and the
coating will depend upon the character of the tone of the impression
desired. Coating over dry iodine to an orange color, then over the
accelerator, to a light rose, and back over iodine one sixth as long as
first coating, will produce a fine, soft tone, and is the coating
generally used for most accelerators. The plate iodized to a dark
orange yellow, or tinged slightly with incipient rose color, coated
over the accelerator to a deep rose red, then back over iodine
one-tenth as long as at first coating, gives a clear, strong, bold,
deep impression.

I will here state a singular fact, which is not generally known to the
operator. If a plate, coated over the iodine to a rose red, and then
exposed to strong dry quick or weak bromine water, so that a change of
color can be seen, then recoated over the iodine twice as long as at
first coating, it will be found far more sensitive when exposed to the
light than when it has been recoated over the iodine one-fourth of the
time of the first coating.

Probably the best accelerating combination is the American compound
formerly known as “Gurney’s American compound,” or some of the
combinations of bromide of lime. The first is thought to possess
perhaps more uniformity in its action than any other combination I have
ever used.

The plate once coated should be kept excluded from the light by means
of the plate holder for the camera box.

I will notice one of the principal causes having a tendency to prevent
the perfect uniformity of chemical action, between the iodine and
silver; hydrogen, or the moisture in the atmosphere, makes a very
perceptible barrier. This moisture may arise as the result of the cold,
from a want of friction in the buffing of the plate, which, coming in
contact with the warmer air, as a writer on this subject says:

“It is well known that as often as bodies, when cold, are exposed to a
warmer air, the humidity contained in them is condensed. It is to this
effect that we must attribute the difficulty experienced in operating
in most cases.” This is corroborated by the results experienced by our
operators. So it is seen that the plate should be of a temperature
above that of the atmosphere. Mr. Gurney submits his plates to a gentle
heat from a spirit lamp just before exposing them to the vapor of
iodine. Experience has convinced me that a plate heated to about 80
deg. before being exposed to iodine will present a far better defined
image than a plate at a temperature of 50 deg. I account for this by
noticing that, at a higher temperature, the plate throws off any larger
crystals that might otherwise be deposited, receiving only the finer,
thus producing a more perfect chemical combination of iodide of silver.
I would call the attention of the operator to this point, as presenting
something of interest, and which may direct in a way of accelerating
the future operations.

That the presence of a film of moisture over the plate is a preventive
of uniform chemical action, may be readily understood from the fact
that iodine is almost insoluble in water, requiring seven thousand
parts of water to dissolve one of iodine, or one grain to a gallon of
water. Yet its affinities for silver and other substances are so
powerful as to prevent its existing in an insulated state, hence we can
account for the frequent occurrence of a plate presenting parts of an
image over its surface. It is quite evident that those parts of plate’s
surface covered with moisture are nothing like as sensitive to the
iodine as those parts perfectly free.

Exposure of the plate in the Camera, and Position.—The time of exposure
necessary to produce an image upon the Daguerreotype plate, can only be
determined by experiment, and requires a liberality of judgment to be
exercised on the part of the operator. The constant variation of the
light renders it impossible to lay down any exact rule upon this point.
Light is not alone to be considered; the amount of coating exercises a
deviating influence, also the subjects to be represented are not
equally photogenic, some requiring much longer time of exposure than
others. This may be easily observed by exposing the plate at the same
time to a plaster bust and a piece of black velvet, the first being a
much stronger reflector of light than the latter: the time necessary to
produce a well developed image of the velvet being about six times
longer than that required to produce an equally defined image of
plaster. The manner of judging correctly of the time is by the
appearance of impression after it has been developed by the mercurial
vapors. Should it present a deep blue or black appearance it is
solarized or over-timed. This sometimes is to an extent, that a perfect
negative is formed, the white being represented black, and the dark
light.

An object requiring the particular care and attention of the operator
is the proper focus. It is not unfrequently the complaint of sitters
that their hands are represented as being magnified and greatly out of
proportion with the general figure. This is the case also with the nose
and eyes, but in a less degree. As this cannot be wholly remedied, it
is desirous to come as near as possible, and in order to do this, it is
necessary to present the figure in such a position as to bring it as
nearly as possible upon the same plane by making all parts nearly at
equal distance from the lenses. This must be done by the sitter
inclining the head and bust formed to a natural, easy position, and
placing the hands closely to the body, thus preserving a propel
proportion, and giving a lively familiarity to the general impression.
It is not an uncommon fault among our less experienced operators to
give a front view of the face of nearly every individual, regardless of
any particular form, and this is often insisted upon by the sitter,[2]
who seems to think the truth of the picture exists principally in the
eyes staring the beholder full in the face.

 [2] I might here picture some curious scenes experienced by our
 operators Every one is familiar with a certain class of our community
 whose ideas of the importance of a free and easy position of the body
 are too closely confined with stays, attention to toilet, tightly
 fitting dress coats and the like, to admit of being represented as if
 nature had endowed them with least possible power of flexibility. To
 such we would suggest the following, to be well learned and retained
 in the mind while presenting themselves before the Daguerreotype
 camera:

“The experience of one who has often been Daguerreotyped, is, to let
the operator have his own way.”

Nothing, in many instances, can be more out of place in a Daguerreotype
portrait than this, for let a man with a thin, long,
defeated-politician-face, be represented by a directly front view, we
have, to all appearances, increased the width of the face to such an
extent as to reveal it flat and broad, losing the characteristic point
by which it would be the most readily recognized. The method we should
adopt in taking the likeness of such an individual as above, would be
to turn the face from the camera, so as to present the end of the nose
and the prominence of the cheek bone equally distant from the lenses,
and then focusing on the corner of the eye towards the nose, we cannot
in many cases, fail to produce an image with the lips, chin, hair, eyes
and forehead in the minutest possible definition.

It should be the study of every operator to notice the effect of the
lights and shades while arranging the sitter, and at the same time be
very particular to give ease in the position.

No matter how successful the chemical effect may have been, should the
image appear stiff and monument-like, all is lost. “In the masterpiece,
grace and elegance must be combined.”

I will here use the words of another, which are very true:

“So great is the difference in many faces, when inspected in opposite
directions, that one of the two views, however accurately taken, would
not communicate the likeness—it not being, the usually observed
characteristic form. When the right view of the head is obtained, it is
first necessary to consider the size of the plate it is to be taken on,
so as to form an idea of the proportion the head should bear to it. The
mind must arrange these points before we commence, or we shall find
everything, too large or too small for the happy proportion of the
picture, and the conveying of a just notion of the stature. The work
will have to be done over, and time sacrificed, if this is not attended
to. The adjustment of the head to the size of the plate (as seen from
the margin of the mat), is not to be taught: everyone must bring
himself, by scrutinizing practice, to mathematical accuracy; for
something will be discovered in every face which can be surmounted only
by experience.

“The eye nearest the camera, in a three-quarter-face, is placed in the
middle of the breadth of the plate; the chin, in a person of middle
stature, in the middle of the length, and higher according to the
proportional height of the person.”

In regard to the proper elevation of the camera, it may be here stated
that I have found it best in taking portraits where the hands are
introduced, to place the camera at about equal height with the eyes of
the sitter, in order to bring the face and hands equi-distant from the
tube. It will be found, if the above be followed, that by attaching a
string to the camera tube, and making a semi-circle, that the face and
hands of the sitter will occupy a corresponding distance, and the
consequence is that the impression will appear without the hands being
magnified. It has been found that a person with a freckly face can have
as fine, fair, and clear an impression as the most perfect complexion;
this may be done by the subject rubbing the face until it is very red.
The effect is to lessen the contrast, by giving the freckles and skin
the same color and the photogenic intensity of the red and yellow being
nearly the same, an impression can be produced perfectly clear.

When a child is to be taken, and there are doubts of its keeping still,
the operation may be accelerated by placing it nearer the window
bringing the screen nearer, and placing a white muslin cloth over the
head; this will enable you to work in one third of the usual time.
Should the person move, or the plate become exposed to the light, it
may be restored to its original sensitiveness by placing it over the
quick, one or two seconds.

Developing the Daguerreotype.—After the plate has been submitted to the
operation of the light, the image is still invisible. It requires to be
exposed to the vapors of heated mercury. It is not absolutely necessary
to apply artificial heat to the mercury to develop the image, for fair
proofs have been produced by placing a plate over the bath at the
ordinary temperature of the atmosphere. This plan, however, requires a
long time and cannot be adopted in practice, even if it were advisable.
The time more usually required in developing the image over the
mercurial vapors, is about two minutes, and the temperature is raised
to a point necessary to produce the desired effect in that time. This
point varies as indicated by different scales, but for the ordinary
scales it is not far from 90 deg. cen.

The mercury bath is accompanied with a centigrade thermometer, by which
the heat is regulated. Those furnished by the manufacturers are not
always correct, and it requires some experience to find the proper
degree on the scale.

I would here remark that it is advisable, when placing the spirit lamp
under the bath, to so arrange it that the position of applied heat
should always be on the same point, viz., should the heat be directly
under the bulb containing the thermometer it would raise the mercury in
the tube to the point marked, and the temperature of that in the bath
would be far below what it should be; hence it is (where time is
followed for developing) that many failures occur. This is observed
more readily in the large baths made of thick iron, particularly upon
first heating. In practice I apply the heat as nearly as possible
between the centre of the bottom of the bath and the bulb containing
the mercury tube. It is advisable to keep the lamp lighted under the
bath from the time of commencing in the morning to the close of
business at night. By this means you have a uniformity of action, that
cannot be otherwise obtained.

It is well known to the experienced Daguerreotypist, that different
atmospheres have a decided effect upon the mercury in developing the
Daguerreotype. It will require a greater degree of heat for one
atmosphere than for another. Experience alone determines this little
difference.

In summer, on cloudy and stormy days, mercurial vapors rise more
readily and quickly than in the temperature of autumn or winter. From
60 degrees upwards towards the boiling point (660 deg.), the vapors of
mercury rise in greater abundance and collect in larger globules on
cold surfaces.

For various reasons I prefer a high temperature and short exposure. It
accelerates the process. It renders the lights of the picture more
strong and clear, while the deep shades are more intense. It gives a
finer lustre to the drapery. The solarized portions also are very
seldom blue, especially after gilding. If heated too high, however, the
light parts become of a dead, chalky white, and the shadows are injured
by numerous little globules of mercury deposited over them. Just the
right quantity of mercury leaves the impression of a transparent,
pearly white tone, which improves in the highest degree in gilding. To
mercurialize with exactness is a nice point. If there is reason to
suspect having timed rather short in the camera, reduce the time over
mercury in a corresponding proportion. A dark impression will be ruined
by the quantity of mercury which would only improve a light one.

If practicable, it is most expedient that the plate be submitted to the
action of mercury immediately on coming from the camera. I have
frequently, however, carried plates for miles in the plate-holders and
after exposing in the camera, brought them back to expose to mercury,
and obtained fair proofs; but for the reason before given, it is
advisable to carry along the bath, and bring out the impression on the
spot.

It is sometimes the practice of inexperienced operators to take the
plate off the bath and examine the impression by solar light. This plan
should be abandoned, as it is almost sure to produce a dense blue film
over the shadows.

This I am led to believe is occasioned by the action of light on the
yet sensitive portions of the plate, and made to appear only by
subsequent exposure to mercury, being equivalent to solarization.

There has been little said by our professors upon the subject of the
position of the plates while exposed to the mercurial vapour. Mr. Hunt,
in referring to this subject, says: “Daguerre himself laid much stress
upon the necessity of exposing the plate to the mercury at an angle of
about 45 deg.. This, perhaps, is the most convenient position as it
enables the operator to view the plate distinctly, and watch the
development of the design; but beyond this, I am satisfied there exists
no real necessity for angular position. Both horizontally and
vertically, I have often produced equally effective Daguerreotypes.” I
presume from the last sentence of Mr. Hunt, that he has confined his
experiments to the smaller sized plates. Hence he may not have thought
of the effect of the vertical exposure of a large plate.

In America this is a subject of no little importance. When an
impression is to be developed upon a plate fifteen by seventeen inches,
were we to use an angle of about 45 deg., it would be found to make a
perceptible difference in the appearance of the image. By examining the
wood tops of our baths as formerly made, it will be found that there is
a great variation in the distance from the mercury to the different
portions of the plate. By measuring one of these tops for the size
plate above mentioned, I find the distance to the nearest point between
the mercury and the plate, to be thirteen, and the middle point
sixteen, and the furthest point twenty-one and a half inches: by this
we see that one point of the plate is eight and a half inches further
from the mercury than the nearest point; even this is not the variation
there would necessarily be, were we to adopt the angle of 45 deg. as
urged by Daguerre.

Among our principal professors, the bevel top will not be found in use
where the large plates are used. Should any one feel desirous to test
more minutely the effect produced by a bevel top bath, I would suggest
to them to place a frame, so constructed as to hold three sixth size
plates, and fit it to the top of the bath, and so arrange it with
openings that the plates may be placed, one at the nearest point of the
mercury, the second midway, and the third to the greatest distance, and
by placing the plates over at one and the same time, the experimenter
will be enabled to judge if there exists a difference in the
developing. In speaking of the above, reference is had to baths to the
ordinary heights used by operators.

We will now proceed to examine the effect produced by mercurial vapor
upon the plate at different lengths of exposure. In some investigations
which I have made upon the appearance of the Daguerreotype impressions
when developed over mercury at 90 deg. C. (194 deg. F.), the following
was the result. Plates, coated and exposed to light in our usual manner
of operating, produced on exposure of

1/2 minute, whole impression, deep blue.

1 minute, ashy and flat; no shadows; linen, deep blue.

1 1/2 minute, coarse and spongy; shadows, muddy; drapery, dirty reddish
brown.

2 minutes, shallow or watery; shadows, yellowish; drapery, brown.

2 1/4 minutes, soft; face, scarcely white; shadows, neutral; drapery,
fine dark brown linen somewhat blue.

2 1/2 minutes, clear and pearly; shadows, clear and positive, of a
purple tint; drapery, jet black, with the dark shades slightly frosted
with mercury.

2 3/4 to 3 minutes, hard and chalky; shadows, harsh; drapery,
roughened, and misty with excess of mercury.

The foregoing results will be found general.

There are numerous opinions among our operators in regard to the
quantity of mercury necessary for a bath. As regards this, I need only
say, similar results occur when two pounds or two ounces are used, but
the quantity generally employed is about a quarter of a pound. I am of
the opinion that one ounce will answer as well as a larger quantity. I
know of no better proof in favor of a small quantity than that
presented in the following incident. Several years since, an operator
(Mr. Senter, of Auburn, N.Y.) of my acquaintance, was requested to go
several miles to take a Daguerreotype portrait of a deceased person. He
packed up his apparatus and proceeded over a rough road for some
distance to the house where he was to take the portrait, and arranging
his apparatus, with all the expedition which the occasion required,
after having everything in usual order (as was supposed), he proceeded
and took some ten or twelve very superior impressions. They were fine,
clear, and well developed. After taking the number ordered, he
proceeded to repack his apparatus, and to his surprise, when he took up
the bottle he carried the mercury in, he found it still filled, and
none in the bath, except only such particles as had adhered to the
sides, after dusting and being jolted for several miles over the rough
road. From this it will be seen that a very little mercury will suffice
to develop fine proofs. I saw some of the impressions referred to
above, and they were certainly well developed, and very superior
specimens of our art.

Removing the Coating.—After the impression has been developed over the
mercurial vapor, the next step is to remove the sensitive coating. For
this purpose the following solution is used:

Put about two ounces of hyposulphite of soda in a pint of water, which
should always be filtered before using. A convenient way of doing this
is to have two bottles, and a large funnel with a sponge pressed into
the neck of it; or, what is better, some filtering paper folded in it.
The solution in one bottle, the funnel is placed in the other, and the
picture held over it; when the solution is poured on the plate, it runs
from it into the filter, and is always ready for use.

It is best that the washing be done immediately on the plate coming
from the mercury bath. If allowed to stand long with the coating on, it
assumes a very dark tint—as the operation of the light continues,
though less active than while exposed in the camera, and destroys that
brightness which would otherwise have been obtained. It is preferable
to wash and gild a picture without it first being dried; yet when there
are doubts of its giving satisfaction, there would sometimes be a
saving by drying and getting the decision of the subject before
gilding, as this last injures the plate for another impression. First,
light your spirit-lamp, then with your plyers take the plate by the
lower right-hand corner, holding it in such a manner that the plyers
will form in a line with the upper left-hand corner; pour on, slowly,
the hyposulphite solution, slightly agitating the plate, until all the
coating is dissolved off; then rinse off with clean water, and if it is
not to be gilded, dry by holding the plate perpendicular with the
bottom left-hand corner lowest, and applying the blaze of the
spirit-lamp to the back, at the same time blowing gently downward on
the face of the plate.

The hyposulphite solution should be often filtered through a sponge,
and it will answer for a great number of washings. Yet it is observed
that the mercury collects in this solution in small globules; these
often come in contact with the plate, causing white spots, which spoil
the impression. They should be guarded against, and the solution
renewed. Again, in order to prevent streaks or scum on the surface of
the plate, it is necessary that the coating should be removed with a
good degree of uniformity. I find in practice that the hyposulphite of
soda in our market varies much as regards strength, and consequently
the rule to be adopted is to make a solution of sufficient strength to
remove the coating in about ten seconds. I am aware that it may be said
that this strong solution would have a tendency to injure the
impression by destroying in a measure the sharpness of outline. To meet
this, it need only to be said that the preventive is, to not let the
solution rest on the surface of the plate for a longer time than is
absolutely necessary, and then it should be drenched copiously with
water; hence a chemical action upon the image is prevented and the
general operation facilitated. This plan is adopted by our first
operators with the greatest success.

If the operator should allow the hyposulphite solution to run over the
plate unevenly, it is quite likely that white or blue streaks would
result. These it is impossible to remove without injury to the
impression. Some, in order to prevent this, breathe over the surface,
thus moistening it and putting it in a condition to receive the
solution with greater uniformity. The plate should be well washed with
water before gilding.

Gilding, or Fixing the Image.—The next process to be given is that for
fixing the image on the plate. This is done by precipitating a thin
film of gold over the surface and is productive of the most brilliant
effect when prepared immediately after the plate has been washed with
water after the application of the hyposulphite solution, and before
the plate has been allowed to dry. When, however, the plate has been
dried and allowed to stand for any time, before gilding, the
hyposulphite wash should be applied as at first, in order to destroy
any chemical coating that may have been formed on exposure of the plate
to the air. For gilding the larger plates, we have a gilding stand so
constructed that the plate can be put on a perfect level. In practice,
I prefer holding the plate with nippers, fastened at one corner. Hold
the plate in the same manner as in removing the coating; pour on the
gilding, newly filtered, until the surface is wholly covered, and with
the blaze of the spirit lamp, at least three inches high, apply it to
the back of the plate, moving it about, that the surface may be heated
with as much uniformity as possible. Continuing this operation, the
surface will generally become covered with small yellow bubbles which
soon disappear, leaving the image clear and distinct.

It is advisable to make use of a lamp having a sufficiently strong
flame to produce the effect in a few minutes. If after a first heating,
it is found that the impression can admit of a greater degree of
intensity, it might be heated anew; but that is seldom necessary, and
often by trying to do too, well, the operator, if he persists in
heating certain parts of the plate, may find the liquid dry up just
above the flame, and inevitably cause a stain; [3] or else the blacks
are covered with a film, or even the coating of gold may suddenly
exfoliate, when small particles are detached from the plate. The
impression is then entirely spoiled, but the plate may be re-polished.

 [3] This can be remedied, however, if it is immediately washed over
 with the same solution that is on the plate, so that the surface shall
 not become cool; continue for a short time to apply the lamp under,
 and agitate the plate slightly, and it will soon be free from all
 imperfections and give a fine clear tone.

It is not unfrequent that the surface assumes a dark, cloudy
appearance. This is generally the best sign that the gilding will bring
out the impression with the greatest degree of distinctness. Soon, the
clouds gradually begin to disappear, and, “like a thing of life” stands
forth the image, clothed with all the brilliancy and clearness that the
combined efforts of nature and art can produce. When in the operator’s
judgment the operation has arrived at the highest state of perfection,
rinse suddenly, with an abundance of clean water, and dry as before
described.

When an impression is dark, the gilding process may be longer
continued; but when light, it should be gilded quickly, as lengthening
the time tends to bleach the impression and make it too white. The
cause of this appears to be, that with a moderate heat the chlorine is
merely set free from the gold, and remaining in the solution, instead
of being driven off, with its powerful bleaching, properties, it
immediately acts upon the shades of the picture. A dark impression can
thus, by a low heat, long-continued, be made quite light. To procure
the best effect, then, heat suddenly with a large blaze, and judging it
to be at the maximum, cool as suddenly as possible.

When the hyposulphite of gold is used instead of the chloride, a less
heat should be employed.

Coloring Daguerreotypes.—Of all the so-called improvements in the
Daguerreotype, the coloring is the least worthy of notice. Yet the
operator is often, in fact most generally, called upon to hide an
excellent specimen under paint. I can conceive of nothing more perfect
in a Daguerreotype than a finely-developed image, with clearness of
lights and shadows, possessing the lively tone resulting from good
gilding. Such pictures, however, are not always had, and then color may
perform the part of hiding the imperfections. We present the following
method as given in Willat’s Manual:

“Daguerreotype portraits are now commonly met with beautifully colored;
but the coloring is a process requiring great care and judgment, and
many good pictures are spoiled in fruitless experiments. Several
different methods of coloring have been proposed. The simplest mode
appears to be that of using dry colors prepared in the following
manner: A little of the color required, very finely ground, is thrown
into a glass containing water, in which a few grains of gum arabic have
been dissolved. After standing a few moments, the mixture may be passed
through bibulous paper, and the residue perfectly dried for use. The
principal colors used are Carmine, Chrome Yellow, Burnt Sienna,
Ultramarine and White; boxes fitted with sets of colors properly
prepared, may be obtained of the dealers, and include Carmine, White,
Lilac, Sky Blue, Pink, Yellow, Flesh color, Orange, Brown, Purple,
Light Green, Dark Green and Blue. With a few colors, however, all the
rest may be made thus: Orange, by Yellow and Red; Purple, with Blue and
Red; Green, Blue and Yellow; Brown, with Umber, Carmine and Lamp Black;
Scarlet, Carmine and Light Red. While it is true that a little color
may relieve the dark metallic look of some Daguerreotypes, it must not
be concealed that the covering of the fine delicate outline and
exquisite gradations of tone of a good picture with such a coating, is
barbarous and unartistic.

“The prevaling taste is, however, decidedly for colored proofs, and the
following directions will assist the amateur in ministering to this
perverted taste, should he be so inclined. The coloring should commence
with the face, and the flesh tint must be stippled on (not rubbed) with
a small camel’s-hair brush, beginning from the centre of the cheek,
taking great care not to go over the outline of the face, and also not
to have too much color in the brush; the eyes and eyebrows must not be
touched with color. After the flesh color is applied, take a piece of
very soft cotton and pass it very gently backwards and forwards over
the face, so as to soften down the color, and then apply the carmine to
give the required tint. For men, the darker tints should predominate,
and for women the warmer. Very light hair may be improved by a slight
tint of brown, or yellow and brown, according to the color. In coloring
the drapery, the same care must be used. No rules can be laid down for
all the different colors required, and the amateur had better obtain
the assistance or advice of some one accustomed to the use of colors. A
little white with a dash of blue or a little silver, will improve white
linen, lace, etc. The jewelry may be touched with gold or silver from
the shells, moistened with distilled water, and laid on with a
fine-pointed sable-hair brush.

“Brilliants may be represented by picking the plate with the point of a
pin or knife.”




CHAPTER II.

MISCELLANEOUS.


Coloring Back Grounds—Transparent ditto—Gilding Dissolvent Solution for
removing Specks—Solarized Impression—To Purify Water—Cleaning
Mercury—Adhesive Paper—Black Stain for Apparatus—Sealing Wax for
Bottles—Rouge—Rotten Stone—Potassa Solution—Hyposulphite
Solution—Substitute for do.—Gilding Solution—Solution for increasing
the Brilliancy of the Daguerreotype—Bleaching Solution;—Cold
Gilding—Neutralizing Agents—Buff Dryer—Keeping Buffs in order—Cleaning
Buckskins—Reflector for taking Views.

To Color Back-grounds—To obtain a properly colored back ground is a
matter of no little importance to the Daguerreotype operator. I had
nearly exhausted all patience, and tried the skill of painters to
obtain a back-ground that would be suitable to my purpose; but all to
no avail. At last I adopted the following method, and at a cost of
coloring of twenty-five cents, can now produce a back-ground far more
valuable than those which had cost five dollars before.

Take common earth paint, such as is used in painting roofs; mix this
with water to about the consistency of cream; then to four quarts of
this mixture add about one pint of glue water (common glue dissolved in
water, also about as thick as cream). This last will cause the paint to
adhere to the cloth, to which it is applied with a common white-wash
brush. By applying the brush on the coating while it is wet, it may be
so blended that not a line can be seen, and a perfectly smooth color of
any shade can be obtained. The shade of color I use is a light
reddish-brown. Tripoli, rotten-stone, or any earthy matter, may be
applied in the same manner.

Transparent or Invisible Back-ground.—I give this as originally
published in my System of Photography, 1849:

“Take a large woollen blanket with long nap, the longer and rougher it
is the finer will be the effect produced; stretch it on a frame of
sufficient size, and suspend the frame at the centre of the upper end
by a string fastened to a nail in the ceiling, from three to five feet
back of the sitter. Having arranged this, fasten another string to the
side of the frame, and while the operation is going on in the camera,
swing the back-ground from right to left, continuing this during the
whole time of sitting, and you have a clear “transparent” back-ground,
which throws the image out in bold relief, and renders the surface of
the plate invisible. If equalled at all it is only by atmospheric
back-ground. I consider it to be the best ever known, and think it
needs but to be tried to afford satisfactory proof that it is so.
Although used by few before, since the first edition of this work at
least two thirds of the operators have adopted its use; for any one can
at once understand the principle and the effect which it produces.”

It may be added that a motion imparted to to any back-ground where
softness is desired, produces an excellent effect.

Gilding Dissolvent.—To one quart of muriatic acid add as much oxide of
iron (common iron rust) as it will dissolve in two days. This may be
done by putting in the oxide in excess. It should be frequently shook,
and when wanted for bottling it should be allowed to stand in order to
settle. When this is done the solution may be poured off, and reduced
by adding to it an equal quantity of water; then it is ready for use.
This constitutes a gilding dissolvent now in our market.

Solution for Removing Specks.—There is probably no one cause of
complaint so general as “what makes those black specks?” There are
several causes which produce them, and probably the most general are
dust, rouge, or a spray of moisture on the plate. It this be the case,
there is no solution which can remove them, as they have prevented a
chemical action with the silver, and their removal would only expose
the surface of the plate which in itself would afford a contrast with
the impression. Another and less dangerous source of these specks is
organic matter contained in the solution employed in dissolving the
chemicals, or the water in washing. Much of the hyposulphite of soda in
market contains a sulphuret, which, coming in contact with the silver
surface, immediately causes oxidation. Such spots, as well also as most
all others found on the plate after it has been exposed in the camera,
can be removed by the following, solution: To one ounce of water add a
piece of cyanide of potassium the size of a pea; filter the solution
and apply by pouring it on the surface of the plate. In all cases the
plate should first be wet with water. Apply a gentle heat, and soon the
spots disappear, leaving the impression clear and free from all organic
matter.

In the absence of cyanide of potassium, a solution of pure hyposulphite
of soda will answer as a fair substitute.

To Redeem, a Solarized Impression.—The Daguerreotype plate, prepared in
the ordinary manner, should be exposed in the camera a sufficient time
to solarize the impression. Then, before it be exposed to the vapor of
mercury, expose it for a very brief period to the vapor of either
chlorine, bromine or iodine. Then expose over mercury, as usual. I have
produced singularly interesting results by this process.

To Purify Water.—Filter the water well, and then add about three drops
of nitric acid to the pint. This can be used as absolutely pure water,
but I would recommend the use of distilled water as preferable.

Cleaning Mercury.—Make a small bag of chamois skin, pour in the
mercury, and squeeze it through the leather. Repeat this several times,
and filter by means of a funnel made of paper, with a very small
aperture, through which it will escape and leave the particles of dust,
or other substances, in the paper. A paper with a pinhole through it
will answer as well, and it is less difficult to make.

Adhesive Paper.—Take gum arabic, four ounces, put it in a wide-mouthed
bottle and pour on water about one-third above the gum. Add half ounce
of isinglass, or fish glue, and a small piece of loaf sugar. Let all
dissolve, and spread over French letter paper, with a brush or piece of
sponge. If once spreading is not enough, perform the same operation a
second time.

Black Stain for Apparatus.—Dissolve gum shellac in alcohol, or procure
shellac varnish at the druggists’, stir in lampblack, and apply with a
sponge or bit of rag. This will adhere to metal, as well as wood, and
is used for the inside of camera, tubes, etc.

Sealing Wax for Bottles.—Melt together six parts rosin and one beeswax,
and add a small quantity of lampblack; or, if red is preferable, add
red lead. Common white wax is best, as most chemicals act less upon it.

When bottles containing bromine are to be sealed, it is well to grease
the stopper. This, however, only when the bottle is in frequent use,
for if it were to be sent by any conveyance it would be likely to fly
out.

Rouge.—The method employed by Lord Ross is probably unsurpassed in the
production of rouge. He has given his process as follows:

“I prepare the peroxide of iron by precipitation with water of ammonia,
from a pure dilute solution of sulphate of iron; the precipitate is
washed, pressed in a screw press till nearly dry, and exposed to a heat
which in the dark appears a dull, low red. The only points of
importance are, that the sulphate of iron should be pure, that the
water of ammonia should be decidedly in excess, and that the heat
should not exceed that I have described. The color will be a bright
crimson inclining to yellow. I have tried both potash and soda, pure,
instead of water of ammonia, but after washing with some degree of
care, a trace of the alkali still remained, and the peroxide was of an
ochrey color, till overheated, and did not polish properly.”

Care should be observed to apply rouge in a dry state to the surface of
the plate.

I would remark, that so far as my experience has gone, I consider good
rouge fully equal to any other polishing, material for the last or
finishing polishing; consequently I shall not take up my space in
enumerating any of the great variety that find few advocates.

Why Rouge is to be preferred.—“Because it burnishes better, and because
it assists in fixing the layer of gold, rendering it less susceptible
of being removed in scales when heated too much.”

Rotten Stone.—“Purchase the best ground rotten stone of the druggist,
put a few ounces at a time in a wedgewood or porcelain mortar, with
plenty of clean rain water. This should have about forty drops of
nitric acid to the quart. Grind well, and after letting the mortar
stand two minutes, pour into a third. After remaining undisturbed eight
minutes, finally pour off into a fourth to settle. Rinse back the
sediment in the second and third, and grind over with a new batch.
Repeat the operation till you have all in the fourth vessel. Let this
stand several hours, and pour off the water very carefully. Set the
deposit in the sun, or by a stove to dry. When perfectly dry,
pulverize, and it is ready for use. With a little trouble you will
obtain in this way a much better article than can generally be bought
of dealers. For the last washing, alcohol, or a mixture of alcohol and
water, is preferable.”

Potassa Solution.—The use of a solution of potassa in the preparation
of the plate was suggested in the early history of the Daguerreotype.
It was thought to possess some peculiar property for improving the tone
of the impression. It is used for moistening the rotten stone in
polishing the plate, and may be prepared by putting about an ounce and
a half of alcohol in a close bottle, and add half a stick of caustic
potash. This will soon become of a deep red color. For use, fill your
small bottle, having a quill in the cork, with alcohol, and add a few
drops of the above, or enough to change it to a bright orange or
saffron color.

A Substitute for the Hyposulphite Solution.—M. DAGUERRE recommends the
use of a solution of salt water for removing the coating off the plate.
I found this of some service at one time during my travels. My
hyposulphite bottle got broke and its contents lost, so as only to
leave enough for preparing gilding. I resorted to the use of salt
solution, and found it to answer well. Make a saturated solution of
salt in water. First wash the plate with clear water; then immerse it
in the saline solution, when it should be agitated, and the coating
will soon disappear. Another process with a salt solution of half the
strength of the above is very interesting and effectual. The plate
having been dipped into cold water, is placed in a solution of common
salt, of moderate strength; it lies without being acted upon at all;
but if it be now touched on one corner with a piece of zinc, which has
been scraped bright, the yellow coat of iodine moves off like a wave
and disappears. It is a very pretty process. The zinc and silver
forming together a voltaic pair, with the salt water intervening,
oxidation of the zinc takes place, and the silver surface commences to
evolve hydrogen gas; while this is in a nascent condition it decomposes
the film of iodide of silver, giving rise to the production of
hydriodic acid, which is very soluble in water, and hence instantly
removed.

This process, therefore, differs from that with hyposulphite. The
latter acts by dissolving the iodide of silver, the former by
decomposing it. It is necessary not to leave the zinc in contact too
long, or it deposits stains, and in large plates the contact should be
made at the four corners successively, to avoid this accident.

Gilding Solution.—To one pint of pure rain or distilled water add
fifteen grains of pure chloride of gold, and to another pint add sixty
grains of hyposulphite of soda. When dissolved, pour the gold solution
into the hyposulphite by small quantities, shaking well after each
addition. The soda solution must not be poured into the gold, as the
gold would be immediately decomposed, and the solution turn black, and
be unfit for use.

Some operators add muriate of potash and other substances, but these do
not possess any advantage except in cases where it is necessary to
bleach the solarized portions of the impression, and when such is the
case, chloride of sodium (common salt) is probably as effective and is
the most convenient. Add about a teaspoonful to two ounces of the
gilding.

Solution, for Increasing the Brilliancy of the Daguerreotype.—This
solution will have the effect to thoroughly cleanse the surface of the
gilded plate and excite a powerful influence on the general character
of the impression. To a solution of three ounces of water, in which is
dissolved a quarter of an ounce of cyanide of potassium, add one
teaspoonful of a solution containing six ounces of water and half an
ounce of each pure carbonate of potash, alum, common salt, gallic acid,
sulphate of copper, and purified borax. While the plate is wet, pour on
a little, and heat it with a powerful blaze. The effect will be quickly
produced, in from three to fifteen seconds. Rinse and dry, as in the
gilding.

Bleaching Solution.—Make a saturated solution of muriate of ammonia
(sal ammoniac) in pure water, and filter through paper. Reduce with an
equal quantity of water when used. When the linen or any other portion
of the impression is badly solarized, after removing the coating, rinse
with water; then pour this upon the surface in the same manner as the
gilding solution. If the solarization be very deep, apply the lamp
beneath, and warm the plate a trifle. Now pour off, and, without
rinsing, apply the gilding. The whole operation must be quickly
performed, or the chlorine soon attacks the shades of the picture. When
properly done, however, the solarized parts are restored to a clear,
transparent white.

Electro, or Cold Gilding.—This process I have adopted, and it produces
exceedingly beautiful impressions for the stereoscope, adding a great
charm to the pleasing effect of that instrument. It also possesses a
pretty and curious effect on views. It is easy of trial, and may be
used by dissolving one gramme of chloride of gold in half a litre of
ordinary water, and thirty grammes of hyposulphite of soda in another
half litre of similar water; then pour the solution of chloride of gold
into that of soda, by little and little, agitating it exactly as in M.
Fizeau’s preparation, of which there is but a variation.

When you wish to use it, pour some into a plate, or any other vessel of
the same kind, sufficient to cover the proof; then, after having added
to it a drop of ammonia, immerse the plate in it as soon as you take it
out of the mercury-box, after having wiped its back and edges, and
agitate the mixture quickly from right to left, so as to dissolve
rapidly the coating of iodide of silver as usual. As soon as the plate
appears white, cease all rapid motion, but continue to give it a slight
undulating one; for if it were allowed to remain still for only a few
minutes, the proof would be clouded. By little and little, the surface
of the plate takes a yellow tint, which darkens more and more,
approaching to bistre. You stop therefore, at the color you wish; and
when the proof has been washed and dried, in the manner previously
explained, it will be found to be fixed, without any stain, with a
limpid surface, and an extraordinary warm tone. If you were to augment
the proportions of the ammonia or chloride of gold, the operation would
progress much quicker, but then the middle of the proof would be always
much clearer than towards the border. The mixture may be used several
times without being renewed. It does not, however, give such a
beautiful color to the impression as when it is newly prepared. By
communicating to the vessel containing the solution a continual motion,
the impression, when once immersed, will be fixed. During that time,
and while attending to anything else, watch its color; and at the end
of ten minutes or a quarter of an hour, take it out of the bath and dry
it.

Agent for Neutralizing Bromine, Chlorine, and Iodine Vapors.—Aqua
ammonia, sprinkled about the chemical or coating room, will soon
neutralize all the vapor in the atmosphere of either chlorine, bromine,
or iodine. No operator should be without, at least, a six-ounce bottle
filled with ammonia. A little of its vapor about the camera-box has a
decided and happy effect. Burnt coffee, pulverized, has also the
property of destroying the vapors of the above chemicals, as also
almost any other agent employed about the Daguerreotype room. Its
deodorizing properties are such that if brought in contact with air
filled with the odor of decomposing meat, it will instantly destroy all
disagreeable smell. It can easily be used in the Daguerreotype room by
placing a little of the raw bean, finely pulverized, on an old plate,
and roasting it over the spirit-lamp.

Buff Dryer.—There are various methods for keeping buffs dry and free
from dust. Some place a sheet of iron against the wall at an angle
sufficient to put a lamp between it and the wall, and then let the buff
rest against the top of the sheet. By this method the buff is for its
full length close to the heated iron, and at the same time exposed to
the heated atmosphere and any dust that may be free. I would recommend
some arrangement by which the buff would be inclosed. I have found the
following to answer the purpose well, which is a box of sheet iron
twenty inches long, eight wide and five high, with one end left open
and the other closed; the cover is made of the same material, with the
edges bent over to go on and off. There are several wires running
through the centre of the sides, which it is necessary to cover with
cloth or paper to absorb all the moisture that may be made by applying
the heat, and the buffs are put in and taken out at the open end. In
order that the heat may be as nearly uniform as possible, an iron bar
one inch wide, eighteen inches long and one half inch thick, is so bent
that the centre is one quarter inch from the bottom of the box, and
that at least two inches of each end come in contact with the bottom;
this being riveted on the bottom, and a lamp with a small blaze applied
to the centre of the bar of iron. This will constitute one of the best
and cheapest buff dryers in use. It may be suspended from the wall by
placing wires around it, or it may stand upon legs. Perhaps a more
convenient plan is to place it under the workbench in a similar
position to a drawer. One precaution is necessary: when first heating
the dryer, apply but a very gentle heat. This will prevent an
accumulation of moisture, which would otherwise pass off in steam,
coming in contact with the buff, thus causing a dampness. Another
caution: never have the temperature of the air in the heater more than
ten degrees above that which surrounds it.

When wheels are used, they should be encased in a sheet iron or wood
case. All those made for our market are provided in this respect.

Keeping Buffs in Order.—This is one of the most important objects to
arrest the attention of the operator. Every buff is more or less liable
to get out of order by dust falling upon or coming in contact with the
polishing powder employed in cleaning the plate. The edge of every
plate should be thoroughly wiped and freed from any material that may
adhere while cleaning. I have adopted the following method, which
proves highly successful:

Rub the buff leather, holding the face down, with the sharp edge of a
pair of shears or a piece of glass. This brings out any portion of the
skin which may have become matted from any moisture, and also takes out
any substance imbedded in it, and prevents it from scratching. Then,
with a stiff brush, rub the buff well, and it will be found to work
well. This same process employ on wheels and hand buffs every morning,
or oftener, as occasion requires.

Preparing Buffs.—Two of these are necessary. That part of the stick to
be covered should be about eighteen or twenty inches long, and three
wide, and made crowning on the face from one end to the other, about
one half inch. Before covering, these are to be padded with two or
three thicknesses of Canton flannel. The buff should not be too hard,
but padded with flannel, so that by drawing it over the plate, it may
touch across the surface. The only proper material for buffs is
prepared buckskin; and if prepared in a proper manner, this needs
nothing but to be tacked upon the stick. There are several varieties of
wheels employed; the one most generally adopted is Lewis’ patent, which
consists of several varieties of wheels. Any operator can make a
suitable wheel on the same plan of a turning lathe.

To Clean Buckskins.—When the operator is compelled to purchase an
unprepared buckskin, the following is a good process for cleaning it:
There is always in the buckskin leather that is purchased, more or less
of an oily matter, which is acquired in its preparation, sometimes even
amounting, to a third of its weight. The following is the mode of
ridding it of this noxious ingredient: Dissolve, in about six or seven
quarts of filtered water, about five ounces of potash; when dissolved,
wash with the solution an ordinary buckskin; when it has been well
stirred in the liquid, the water becomes very soapy, owing to the
combination of the potash with the oily matters contained in the skin.
Throw away this solution and use some fresh water without potash and
rather tepid; change it several times until it remains quite limpid.
Then gently stretch the skin to dry in an airy shaded place. When
thoroughly dried, rub it well between the hands. It thus becomes very
pliant and velvet-like.

Reflectors for Taking Views.—There have been excellent cameras
introduced for taking views, but the time of exposure, which is
increased in proportion to the focal length, is considered an
objection; consequently many adhere to the old plan of using the
speculum, or rather, substitute a mirror. I now have one which I have
used for several years and find it equal to any article of the kind
have ever tried. One is easily made by a tin man, at a trifling
expense. Procure a piece of best plate looking-glass, two and a half by
five inches for a quarter, or four by eight for a half-sized camera;
put a piece of pasteboard of the same size on the back, to protect the
silvering, and stick around the edge in the same manner as in putting
up a picture. Take a sheet of tin for the large size, or a half sheet
for the other; place the glass crosswise in the centre; bend the ends
of the tin over the edge of the glass and turn them back so as to form
a groove to hold the glass, and still allow it to slide out and in.
These ends of the tin must be turned out flaring, that they may not
reflect in the glass.

Have a tin band about an inch wide made to fit close on the end of the
camera tube; place it on, and taking the tin containing the glass,
bring it to an angle of forty-five degrees with the tube, extending
nearly the whole length of the glass in front of the lenses; lap the
loose ends of the tin on each side of the tin rim, and having your
camera turned on the side to throw the view lengthwise, arrange the
exact angle by examining the image on the ground-glass. When you have
it exactly right, hold it while it is soldered fast to the band. Take
out your glass and stain the tin black, to prevent reflection.




CHAPTER III.

CHEMICALS.


Bromine and its Compounds—Iodine and its Compounds—Chlorine and its
compounds—Cyanide of Potassium—Hyposulphite of Soda—Hyposulphite of
Gold—Nitric Acid—Nitro-Muriatic Acid—Hydrochloric Acid—Hydrofluoric
Acid—Sulphuric Acid—Accelerating Substances—Liquid Sensitives—Dry
Sensitives, etc., etc.

BROMINE.

An article so extensively used in the practice of the Daguerreotypic
art as Bromine, is deserving of especial attention, and accordingly
every person should endeavor to make himself familiar with its
properties and applications.

History.—This element was discovered in 1826 by M. Balard, in the
mother-liquor, or residue of the evaporation of sea-water. It is named
from its offensive odor (bromos, bad odor). In nature it is found in
sea-water combined with alkaline bases, and in the waters of many
saline springs and inland seas. The salt springs of Ohio abound in the
compounds of bromine, and it is found in the waters of the Dead Sea.
The only use which has been made of bromine in the arts is in the
practice of photography. It is also used in medicine In a chemical
point of view it is very interesting, from its similarity in
properties, and the parallelism of its compounds to chlorine and
iodine.

Dr. D. Alter, of Freeport, Pa., is the only American manufacturer, and
furnishes all of the “American Bromine.” Yet we understand much
purporting to be of German manufacture is prepared from that made in
Freeport. This is done by individuals in this city, who get well paid
for the deception.

For the successful application of bromine as an accelerating agent, we
are indebted to Mr. John Goddard of London, who at the time was
associated with Mr. John Johnson, now a resident of this city.

Preparation.—The mother-liquor containing bromides is treated with a
current of chlorine gas, which decomposes these salts, setting the
bromine free, which at once colors the liquid to a reddish brown color.
Ether is added and shaken with the liquid, until all the bromine is
taken up by the ether, which acquires a fine red color and separates
from the saline liquid.

{74}

Solution of caustic potash is then added to the ethereal solution,
forming bromide of potassium and bromate of potash. This solution is
evaporated to dryness, and the salts being collected are heated in a
glass retort with sulphuric acid and a little oxide of manganese. The
bromine is distilled, and is condensed in a cooled receiver, into a red
liquid.

Properties.—Bromine somewhat resembles chlorine in its odor, but is
more offensive. At common temperatures it is a very volatile liquid, of
a deep red color, and with a specific gravity of 3, being one of the
heaviest fluids known. Sulphuric acid floats on its surface, and is
used to prevent its escape. At zero it freezes into a brittle solid. A
few drops in a large flask will fill the whole vessel when slightly
warmed, with blood red vapors, which have a density of nearly 6.00, air
being one. It is a non-conductor of electricity, and suffers no change
of properties from heat, or any other of the imponderable agents. It
dissolves slightly in water, forming a bleaching solution.

Chloride of Bromine.—This as an accelerating agent is by many
considered superior {75} to the other Bromide combinations. It can be
readily prepared by passing a current of chlorine through a vessel
containing bromine. A mixture of two parts muriatic acid and one of
black oxide of manganese, should be put into a flask having a bent tube
to conduct the chlorine vapor into the bromine in another vessel. This
last vessel should also be supplied with a bent tube for conducting the
combined vapors with a third vessel or receiver. On the application of
the heat from a spirit lamp to the bottom of the flask, a current of
chlorine gas will be disengaged, and pass into the bromine, when it
readily combines, and gives off a vapor, which, when condensed in the
third vessel, forms a volatile yellowish-red liquid. It is best, even
at ordinary temperature, to place the receiver in an ice bath. For
manner of using, see farther on, under head of Accelerators.

Bromides.—A bromide treated with oil of vitriol, disengages
chlorohyadic acid; but vapors of bromine are constantly disengaged, at
the same time imparting a brown color to the gas. If the bromide be
treated with a mixture of sulphuric acid, and peroxide of manganese,
bromide is only disengaged. A solution of a bromide gives, with of
nitrate {76} silver, a light yellowish white precipitate of bromide of
silver, which is insoluble in an excess of acid, and readily dissolves
in ammonia. The precipitated bromide is colored by light like the
chloride, but is immediately tinged brown, while the chloride assumes
at first a violet hue. The bromides, in solution, are readily
decomposed and chloride being set free, colors the liquid brown.

In the whole range of heliographic chemicals there is probably not
another collection less understood and being so productive of
interesting investigation as the bromides.

Bromide of Iodine.—M. de Valicours furnishes us with the best method
for preparing this mixture:

“Into a bottle of the capacity of about two ounces, pour thirty or
forty drops of bromine, the precise quantity not being of importance.
Then add, grain by grain, as much iodine as the bromine will dissolve
till quite saturated. This point is ascertained when some grains of the
iodine remain undissolved. They may remain in the bottle, as they will
not interfere with the success of the preparation.

“The bromide of iodine thus prepared, from its occupying so small a
space, can very easily be carried, but in this state it is much too
concentrated to be used. When it is to be employed, pour a small
quantity, say fifteen drops, by means of a dropping-tube, into a bottle
containing about half an ounce of filtered river water. It will easily
be understood that the bromide of iodine can be used with a greater or
less quantity of water without altering the proportion which exists
between the bromine and iodine.”

This article forms a very good dry accelerator, and is by some persons
thought superior to all others, as it works with great uniformity, and
is less liable to scum the plate in coating at high temperatures, or
when the thermometer indicates a heat above 60 deg.

Bromide of Potassium—Is prepared by mixing bromine and a solution of
pure potass together, and evaporating to dryness; it crystallizes in
small cubes, and dissolves readily in water. This agent is extensively
employed in the paper and glass processes.

Bromide of Lime. This the principal accelerator used in the American
practice, and is the best of all dry combinations at present employed.
There are many reasons why the dry is advantageous; these are too
familiar to repeat.

“The bromide of lime may be produced by allowing bromine vapor to act
upon hydrate of lime for some hours. The most convenient method of
doing this is to place some of the hydrate at the bottom of the flask,
and then put some bromine into a glass capsule supported a little above
the lime. As heat is developed during the combination, it is better to
place the lower part of the flask in water at the temperature of about
50 deg. Fah.; the lime gradually assumes a beautiful scarlet color, and
acquires an appearance very similar to that of the red iodide of
mercury. The chloro-iodide of lime may be formed in the same manner; it
has a deep brown color. Both these compounds, when the vapor arising
from them is not too intense, have an odor analogous to that of
bleaching powder, and quite distinguishable from chlorine, bromine, or
iodine alone.”

Farther on, I have given, in connection with accelerators, a process I
adopt, which is far less tedious and equally reliable.

Bromide of Silver—May be formed by pouring an alkaline bromide into a
solution of nitrate of silver, in the shape of a white, slightly
yellowish precipitate, which is insoluble in water and nitric acid, but
readily dissolves in ammonia and the alkaline hyposulphites. Chlorine
easily decomposes bromide of silver, and transforms it into chloride.

M. Biot has expressed his opinion, that it is not possible to find any
substance more sensitive to light than the bromide of silver. This is
true to a certain extent, but in combination with deoxidizing agents,
other preparations have a decided superiority over the pure bromide of
silver.

Bromide of Gold—Is readily prepared by adding a little bromide to the
brown gold of the assayers, and allowing it to remain some time under
water, or assisting its action by a gentle heat. It forms a salt of a
bright crimson color, but in its general properties is precisely
similar to the chloride used in gilding.

Bromide of Magnesia—Is prepared in the same manner as bromide of lime.

This mixture is particularly adapted for hot climates, and is used in
this country by some few who regard its use as a valuable secret.

Bromide of Starch.—This preparation is much used, but not alone. It is
combined with lime by putting about one part in measure of starch to
four of lime. It is prepared by adding bromine to finely pulverized
starch, in the same manner as bromide of lime. (See Accelerators.)

Experiments with Bromine.—Place in a very flaring wine glass a few
drops (say ten) of bromine, then place a small piece of phosphorus
about one-twentieth of an inch in diameter. Place the latter on the end
of a stick from five to ten feet in length. So place it that the
phosphorus can be dropped into the glass, and in an instant combustion
giving a loud report will be the result.

b. Expose a daguerreotype plate to the vapor of bromine, it assumes a
leaden-grey color, which, blackens by light very readily. Exposing this
to mercury will not produce any decided action upon the lights. Immerse
it in the solution of the muriate of soda, and the parts unacted upon
by light becomes a jet black, while the parts on which the light has
acted will be dissolved off, leaving a clean coating of silver. This
will be a most decided black picture on a white ground.

c. Expose an impressioned plate, that has been sufficient time in the
camera to become solarized, to the vapors of bromine, and the
impression will be fully developed and exhibit no signs of
solarization. The exposure over the bromine most be very brief.
Chlorine or iodine will produce the same result. The latter is
preferable.

Again, should the impressioned plate be exposed too long over the vapor
of bromine, the impression would be rendered wholly insensitive to the
mercurial vapor. Hence this method is resorted to for restoring the
sensibility of the plate when there is reason to believe that the
impression would not be a desirable one; as, for example, if a likeness
of a child be wanted, and it had moved before the plate had been
sufficiently long exposed in the camera, the plate may be restored to
its original sensitiveness by re-coating over bromine, as above, thus
saving the time and labor of re-preparing the plate for the chemicals.

d. If by accident (we would not advise a trial to any extent of this),
you should inhale a quantity of the vapor of bromine, immediately
inhale the vapor of aqua ammonia, as this neutralizes the dangerous
effect of the bromine vapor. Every operator should be provided with a
bottle of ammonia, as a little sprinkled about the chemical room soon
disinfects it of all iodine or bromine vapor, and also tends to
facilitate the operation in the camera.

IODINE.

History of Iodine.—This is one of the simple chemical bodies which was
discovered in 1812 by M. Courtois, of Paris, a manufacturer of
saltpetre, who found it in the mother-water of that salt. Its
properties were first studied into by M. Gay Lussac. It partakes much
of the nature of chlorine and bromine. Its affinity for other
substances is so powerful as to prevent it from existing in an isolated
state. It occurs combined with potassium and sodium in many mineral
waters, such as the brine spring of Ashby-de-la-Zouche, and other
strongly saline springs. This combination exists sparingly in
sea-water, abundantly in many species of fucus or sea-weed, and in the
kelp made from them. It is an ingredient in the Salt Licks, saline, and
brine springs of this country, especially of those in the valley of the
Mississippi. It is sparingly found in fresh-water plants, as well also
in coal, and in combination with numerous other bodies.

Fermented liquors contain iodine; wine, cider, and perry are more
iodureted than the average of fresh waters. Milk is richer in iodine
than wine; independently of the soil, with which it varies, the
proportion of iodine in milk is in the inverse ratio of the abundance
of that secretion. Eggs (not the shell) contain much iodine. A fowl’s
egg weighing 50 gr. contains more iodine than a quart of cow’s milk.
Iodine exists in arable land. It is abundant in sulphur, iron, and
manganese ores, and sulphuret of mercury: but rare in gypsum, chalk,
calcareous and silicious earths. Any attempt to extract iodine
economically should be made with the plants of the ferro-iodureted
fresh waters. Most of the bodies regarded by the therapeutists as
pectoral and anti-scrofulous are rich in iodine.

It is probably to the application of this body that we owe the
discovery of the daguerreotype. There is no record of the precise date
when Daguerre commenced experimenting with iodine, but by the published
correspondence between him and M. Neipce, his partner, it was previous
to 1833. There is no doubt, however, that the first successful
application was made in 1838, as the discovery was reported to the
world early in January, 1839.

Preparation.—Iodine is mostly prepared from kelp, or the half vitrified
ashes of seaweed, prepared by the inhabitants of the western islands,
and the northern shores of Scotland and Ireland. It is treated with
water, which washes out all the soluble salts, and the filtered
solution is evaporated until nearly all the carbonate of soda and other
saline matters have crystallized out. The remaining liquor, which
contains the iodine, is mixed with successive portions of sulphuric
acid in a leaden retort, and after standing some days to allow the
sulphureted hydrogen, etc., to escape, peroxide of manganese is added,
and the whole gently heated. Iodine distills over in a purple vapor,
and is condensed in a receiver, or in a series of two-necked globes.

Properties.—Iodine is solid at the ordinary temperature, presenting the
appearance of dark-grey or purple spangles, possessing a high degree of
metallic lustre. It somewhat resembles plumbago, with which it is
sometimes diluted, particularly when it is fine. Operators should
endeavor to secure the larger crystals. It melts at 224.6 deg., forming
a brown or nearly black liquid. It boils at about 356 deg., and emits a
very deep violet colored vapor. It gives off a very appreciable vapor,
sufficient for all purposes of forming the iodide of silver on the
daguerreotype plate, at a temperature of 45 deg. or even lower. Iodine
crystallizes readily. Every operator has found upon the side of the jar
in his coating-box, perfectly regular crystals, deposited there by
sublimation.

Water dissolves but a small proportion of iodine, requiring 7000 parts
of water to dissolve one of iodine, {85} or one grain to the gallon of
water. Alcohol and ether dissolve it freely, as does a solution of
nitrate or hydrochlorate of ammonia and of iodides.

The density of solid iodine is 4.95; that of its vapor 8.716. It
greatly resembles chlorine and bromine in its combinations, but its
affinities are weaker. It does not destroy the majority of organic
substances, and vegetable colors generally resist its action. It
combines with several organic substances, imparting to them peculiar
colors. It colors the skin brown, but the stain soon disappears.

Chloride of Iodine—Is formed by passing chlorine into a bottle
containing some iodine. This can be readily done by pouring one ounce
and a half of muriatic acid upon a quarter of an ounce of powdered
black oxide of manganese, and heat it gradually in a flask, to which is
adapted a bent glass tube. This tube must connect with the bottle
containing the iodine, and the yellowish-green gas disengaged will
readily combine with the iodine, forming a deep red liquid, and the
operation is complete. The use of chloride of iodine will be referred
to in connection with the Accelerators.

{86}

Iodides.—The iodide treated with the oil of vitriol, instantly produces
a considerable deposit of iodine; and if the mixture be heated, intense
violent vapors are disengaged. The reaction is due to the decomposition
of oil of vitriol by iodohydric acid, water and sulphurous acid being
formed, and iodine set free. The iodides in solution are decomposed by
chlorine, iodine being precipitated, the smallest quantity of which in
solution is instantly detected by its imparting to starch an intensely
blue color.

Iodide of Potassium.[4]—This compound is easily made in the following
manner: Subject to a moderate heat a mixture of 100 parts of iodine, 75
of carbonate of potash, 30 of iron filings, and 120 parts of water.
This mass must be thoroughly dried and then heated to redness; the
resulting reddish powder is to be washed with water, and the solution
obtained filtered, and evaporated to dryness. It is found that 100
parts of iodine yield 135 parts of very white, but slightly alkaline,
iodide of potassium.

 [4] I shall present the preparation of only a few iodides, and such as
 are more intimately connected with the Daguerreotype.

Experiment.—On projecting dry pulverized iodide of potassium into fused
anhydrous phosphoric acid, a violent disengagement of iodine takes
place, attended by a transient ignition; fused hydrate of phosphoric
acid liberates iodine abundantly from iodide of potassium; this
reaction is accompanied by the phenomenon of flame and formation of a
considerable quantity of hydriodic acid.

Iodide of Mercury.—For the preparation of iodide of mercury, Dublanc
recommends to cover 100 grms. of mercury with 1 kilogrm. of alcohol, to
add 124 grms. of iodine gradually in portions of ten grms., and
agitating between each fresh addition, until the alcohol becomes
colorless again. After the addition of the last 4 grms. the alcohol
remains colored, the whole of the mercury having become converted into
iodide. The resulting preparation is washed with alcohol; it is
crystalline and of a hyacinth color.

Iodide of Silver.—This compound is formed upon every plate upon which a
Daguerreotype is produced. The vapor of iodine coming in contact with
the silver surface, forms an iodide which is peculiarly sensitive to
light.

The various colors produced are owing to the thickness of the coating,
and the maximum sensibility of the coating, as generally adopted, is
when it assumes a deep yellow, or slightly tinged with rose color.

This compound is largely employed in most photographic processes on
paper, and may be easily prepared by the following formula: By adding
iodide of potassium to a solution of nitrate of silver, a
yellowish-white precipitate of iodide of silver is obtained, which is
insoluble in water, slightly soluble in nitric acid, and soluble in a
small degree in ammonia, which properties seem easily to distinguish it
from the chloride and bromide of silver. Chlorine decomposes it and
sets the iodine free, and chlorohydric acid converts it into a
chloride. It fuses below a red heat. Although the effect of light on
the iodide is less rapid than on the chloride, the former sooner
turning black, assuming a brown tinge; but when in connection with
gallic acid and the ferrocyanate of potash, it forms two of the most
sensitive processes on paper.

Iodide of silver dissolves easily in a solution of iodide of potassium,
and the liquid deposits in evaporation crystals of a double iodide.

Iodide of Gold.—If a solution of potassium be added to a solution of
chloride of gold, a precipitate of iodide of gold takes place, soluble
in an excess of the precipitate. A little free potash should be added
to combine with any iodide that may chance to be set free by the
chloride of gold.

Iodide of Lime is prepared by adding iodine to hydrate of lime (which
will be referred to farther on) until the mixture assumes a light
yellow shade, when wanted for combinations with accelerators, or to a
dark brown when employed for the first coating. This latter mixture has
been sold in our market under the name of “Iodide of Brome.”

Iodide of Bromine.—(See page 76.)

Experiments with Iodine.—Place a plate which has been exposed in the
camera over the vapor of iodine for a very brief period, and it will
present the appearance of the impression having been solarized.

b. Upon a Daguerreotype plate, from which an impression has been
effaced by rubbing or otherwise, the picture may be made to reappear by
merely coating it over with iodine.

c. Place in a vessel a little water, into which put the smallest
possible quantity of free iodine and add a little starch, and the
liquid will instantly assume a blue color. Advantage is taken of this
fact in the laboratory to detect the presence of iodine in liquids. The
starch should be dissolved in boiling water and allowed to cool. There
are numerous other interesting experiments that can be performed by the
aid of iodine, but it is unnecessary here to consume more space.

CHLORINE.

History.—The Swedish chemist, Scheele, in 1774, while examining the
action of hydrochloric acid on peroxide of manganese, first noticed
this element. He called it dephlogisticated muriatic acid. It was
afterwards, by the French nomenclaturists, termed oxygenated muriatic
acid, conceiving it to be a compound of oxygen and muriatic acid. This
view of its notice was corrected by Sir H. Davy (in 1809), who gave it
the present name. In 1840-41, this gas vas employed for accelerating
the operation of light upon the iodized Daguerreotype plate. John
Goddard, Wolcott & Johnson, Claudet, Draper, Morse and others, were
among the first made acquainted with its use. Count Rumford, Ritter,
Scheele, Seebert and others, experimented with chlorine in regard to
its effect when exposed to the action of light in combination with
silver. In 1845, M. Edward Becquerel announced that he had “been
successful in obtaining, by the agency of solar radiations, distinct
impressions, of the colors of nature.”

On the 4th of March, 1851, Neipce, St. Victor, a former partner of
DAGUERRE, announced that he had produced “all the colors by using a
bath of bichloride of copper, and that a similar phenomenon occurs with
all salts of copper, mixed with chlorine.”

Preparation.—This is easily accomplished by putting about two parts of
hydrochloric (muriatic) acid on one of powdered black oxide of
manganese, and heating it gradually in a flask or retort, to which may
be adapted a bent glass tube. A yellowish-green gas is disengaged,
which being conducted through the glass tube to the bottom of a bottle,
can readily be collected, being much heavier than the air, displaces it
completely and the bottle is filled (which can be seen by the green
color); a greased stopper is tightly fitted to it, and another bottle
may be substituted.

In all experiments with chlorine, care should be taken not to inhale
the gas!

Properties.—Chlorine is a greenish-yellow gas (whence its name, from
chloros, green), with a powerful and suffocating odor, and is wholly
irrespirable. Even when much diluted with air, it produces the most
annoying irritation of the throat, with stricture of the chest and a
severe cough, which continues for hours, with the discharge of much
thick mucus. The attempt to breathe the undiluted gas would be fatal;
yet, in a very small quantity, and dissolved in water, it is used with
benefit by patients suffering under pulmonary consumption.

Under a pressure of about four atmospheres, it becomes a limpid fluid
of a fine yellow color, which does not freeze at zero, and is not a
conductor of electricity. It immediately returns to the gaseous state
with effervescence on removing the pressure.

Water recently boiled will absorb, if cold, about twice its bulk of
chlorine gas, acquiring its color and characteristic properties. The
moist gas, exposed to a cold of 32 deg., yields beautiful yellow
crystals, which are a definite compound of one equivalent of chlorine
and ten of water. If these crystals are hermetically sealed up in a
glass tube, they will, on melting, exert such a pressure as to liquefy
a portion of the gas, which is distinctly seen as a yellow fluid, not
miscible with the water which is present. Chlorine is one of the
heaviest of the gases, its density being 2.47, and 100 cubic inches
weighing 76.5 grains.

Chlorine Water.—This combination, which is used in conducting M.
Neipce’s process, can be readily prepared by conducting the gas into a
bottle containing distilled water. One part water dissolves two parts
of chlorine.

Chlorides.—The metallic chlorides are nearly all soluble in water; that
of silver and protochloride of mercury being the only exceptions. A
metallic chloride, treated with oil of vitriol, disengages chlorohydric
acid. Heated with a mixture of peroxide of manganese and sulphuric
acid, chlorine is given off, which is easily recognized by its odor and
other physical properties.

The chlorides dissolve in water; give with nitrate of silver, a white
precipitate, even in highly diluted solutions, becoming violet colored
and finally black when exposed to the light. The rapidity of the change
of color is proportioned to the intensity of the light. It is insoluble
in nitric acid, but readily soluble in ammonia; it fuses without
decomposition, forming, when cold, a tough, horny mass, and is reduced
by hydrogen and by fusion with carbonate of soda, or with resin.

Chloride of Bromine. (See page 74.)

Chloride of Iodine. (See page 85.)

Chloride of potassium.—or (Muriate of Potassa).—Dissolve half an ounce
of carbonate of potassa in water, and neutralize with muriatic acid.
Upon concentrating the solutions, cubic crystals will be obtained,
having a taste similar to common salt. They consist of potassium and
chloride, and when dissolved in water they may be regarded as muriate
of potassa.

Chloride of Lime.—Mix half an ounce of slacked lime (hydrate of lime)
with six ounces of water, and conduct into this milk of lime, with
frequent agitation, as much chlorine gas as will evolve from two ounces
of muriatic acid and half an ounce of black oxide of manganese. The
liquid clarifies by standing; may be regarded as a solution of chloride
of lime, and must be protected from the air and light. It may also be
made without putting in the water with the hydrate of lime, by merely
passing the chlorine into the hydrate of lime. This last is by some
used in preparations for accelerating the operation of taking
Daguerreotypes, but when used for this purpose it is in small
quantities.

Chloride of Calcium.—To one part of water add two parts of muriatic
acid, and add pieces of common chalk until effervescence ceases; then
filter through cotton cloth and evaporate it by placing it in all
earthen or porcelain dish, over a slow fire, to the consistency of a
syrup. When cooling, large prismatic crystals of chloride of calcium
are formed. These must be quickly dried by pressing between folds of
blotting paper and kept carefully excluded from the air, as it readily
attracts hydrogen. For most daguerreotype purposes, the syrup may be at
once evaporated to dryness. This is frequently placed in the iodine
coating box for the purpose of keeping the atmosphere dry. It is so
easily made that every operator can provide himself with it in a short
time, and at little expense.

Chloride of Gold.—Is prepared by dissolving gold in aqua regia, a
composition of one part of nitric to two parts of muriatic acid. Gold
foil is the best for our purposes; coin, however, answers, in most
cases, for the daguerreotype operator, as the alloy, being so slight is
not noticed in the gilding process. When the latter is used, it will
facilitate the operation to beat it out, forming a thin sheet, and then
cutting in small strips. Where purity is required, foil is better. The
gold is placed in three or four times its own weight of the above
acids. For this purpose, an evaporating dish is best (a common saucer
will do); a moderate heat may be applied to favor the action. The
mixture should be stirred often with a glass rod; care should be
observed not to apply too much heat, for at a temperature of about 300
deg. the chlorine would be expelled and leave a metallic precipitate,
which would require re-dissolving. Acid may at any time be added if
necessary to dissolve the gold, but it is advisable to add as little
excess as possible, as it would require more time to evaporate. After
all the gold has dissolved, and the liquid assumes a deep red color,
the solution should be allowed to cool, being stirred nearly all the
time. This salt is of a reddish-brown color. It is rarely we find in
our market good chloride of gold, as common, salt is used for the bulk;
and when the bottles are labelled “15 grains,” “20 grains,” nine-tenths
do not in reality contain exceeding five grains of chloride of gold.
The salt is mixed with the above solution when it is cooling, and gives
bright yellow crystals, which some of our uninformed operators conceive
to be the best quality.

Chloride of Silver.—(Oxide of Silver.)—Take any quantity of silver coin
or other silver, roll or hammer it thin; cut in small pieces. This in
order to save time. Put the silver in a glass or earthen vessel
(Florence flask is best); pour in nitric acid and water, about three
parts of the former to one of the latter. The operation of cutting up
the silver may be facilitated by applying a gentle heat. This blue
solution consists of oxide of silver and oxide of copper, both combined
with nitric acid. Should the operator wish a pure solution of silver,
which, however, is not always used, he may obtain it in the following
manner:

To separate the two metals contained in the above solution from each
other, put some bright copper coins into the solution and set it aside
in a warm place for three or four days, occasionally giving it a
circular motion. The separated laminae are pure silver, which is to be
digested with ammonia until it ceases to be colored blue. The silver,
after being washed and dried, is again dissolved in nitric acid, and
the liquid, diluted with water, is kept as solution, of silver.

Either of the above solutions (the one of oxide of silver and copper,
and the pure silver solution) may be prepared for use by putting them
in a bottle, with a quantity of water, and adding common fine salt, you
obtain a white curdy precipitate of chloride of silver. No matter how
much salt is used, provided enough be added to throw down all the
chloride of silver. This solution should be well agitated and then
allowed to stand for a few minutes; thus the white precipitate is in
the bottom of the bottle. When the water has become clear, pour it off
with care, leaving the sediment behind, then add a fresh quantity of
clean water, shake, let settle, and pour off as before. Repeat the same
for several times, and the excess of salt will disappear, leaving the
white precipitate, which may be drained of the water and dried in the
dark, and kept free from light and air.

CYANIDE OF POTASSIUM.

Cyanide of Potassium.—This important article is worthy the undivided
attention of every Daguerreotypist. I here give Mr. Smee’s process for
its preparation. This is from that author’s work entitled, “Electro
Metallurgy,” American edition:

“The cyanide of potassium, so often alluded to while treating of the
metallo-cyanides, may be formed in several ways. It may be obtained by
heating to a dull redness the yellow ferrocyanate of potash, in a
covered vessel, filtering and rapidly evaporating it. The objection to
this method, however, is that without great care the whole of the
ferrocyanate is not decomposed, a circumstance which much reduces its
value for electro-metallurgy. By boiling, however, the ignited residue
with spirits of wine this difficulty is said to be overcome, as the
ferrocyanate is absolutely insoluble in that menstruum, while the
cyanuret, at that heat, freely dissolves, and is as easily re-deposited
on cooling.

“There is, however, a much better process by which this salt may be
formed, viz. by simply transmitting hydrocyanic acid through potassium.
Although the modes of making this acid are very numerous, there is but
one which is likely to be employed on a very large scale, and that is
its formation from the yellow ferrocyanate by means of sulphuric acid.
This process is performed as follows: any given weight of the yellow
salt is taken and dissolved in about five times its weight of water;
this is placed in a retort, or some such analogous vessel, to which is
then added a quantity of strong sulphuric acid, twice the weight of the
salt, and diluted with three or four times its quantity of water. A
pipe is carried from the neck of the retort to the receiving bottle,
which should be kept as cool as possible.

“For small operations, those invaluable vessels, Florence flasks,
answer well: a bent tube being connected at one end to its month, the
other passing into the second vessel; heat should be cautiously applied
by means of an Argand lamp, a little vessel of sand being placed under
the flask, which helps the acid to decompose the salt. Prussic acid is
then generated and passes through the tube to the recipient vessel,
which is to be charged with liquor potassae.

“When the potash is saturated, the operation is completed. The Germans
recommend a strong, alcoholic solution of potassa to be used in the
second vessel, for in this case, the hydrocyanic or prussic acid
combines with the potassa, forming a hydrocyanate of potassa, or, the
water being abstracted, the cyanuret of potassium, which spontaneously
precipitates, on the saturation of the fluid, the cyanuret, being
insoluble in strong alcohol. The ferrocyanate of potash may be
considered as containing three equivalents of hydrocyanic acid, two of
potash and one of iron; but, unfortunately, we can only obtain half the
acid from the salt, owing to the formation of a compound during its
decomposition which resists the action of the acid. The decomposition
of this salt taking 2 equivalents or 426 grains (to avoid fractions)
would afford 3 equivalents or 81 grains of hydrocyanic, or prussic
acid, capable of forming 198 grains of cyanuret of potassium, while in
the retort there would remain 384 grains or 3 equivalents of bisulphate
of potash, and 1 equivalent or 174 grains of a peculiar compound, said
to contain 3 equivalents of cyanogen, 1 of potassium, and one of iron
(Pereira). It is manifest that, but for this later compound, we might
double the quantity of hydrocyanic acid from the yellow salt.”

The decomposition just described is the one usually received; but too
much reliance must not be placed on its accuracy, for the analysis of
the several compounds is too difficult for the results to be fully
admitted. The residue left in the retort speedily turns to one of the
blues, identical with, or allied to, Prussian blue. This is at best a
disagreeable process to conduct, for the hydrocyanic acid formed
adheres so strongly to the glass, that, instead of being freely given
off, bubbles are evolved suddenly with such explosive violence as
occasionally to crack the vessel. This may be remedied as far as
possible by the insertion of plenty of waste pieces of platinum—if
platinized, so much the better, as that facilitates the escape of the
gas. The heat should be applied to every part of the vessel, and the
flame should not be allowed to play upon one single part alone. Large
commercial operations are performed in green glass or stone-ware
retorts.

“Now for one word of advice to the tyro: Remember that you are working
with prussic acid; therefore, never conduct the process in a room, the
fumes being quite as poisonous as the solution of the acid itself;
moreover, have always a bottle of ammonia or chlorine by your side,
that should you have chanced to inhale more than is pleasant, it will
be instantly at hand to counteract any bad effects. It is stated by
Pereira, that a little sulphuric acid or hydroferrocyanic acid passes
to the outer vessel, but probably the amount would be of no consequence
for electro-metallurgy, otherwise, it might be as well to use a
Woulfe’s apparatus, and discard the salt formed in the first vessel. To
the large manufacturer it may be worth considering whether some other
metallo-cyanuret, formed in a similar manner to the ferrocyanuret,
might not be more advantageously employed, because the residue of the
process last described contains a large quantity of cyanogen which the
acid is unable to set free.

“There are other modes of procuring prussic acid, besides the one which
has been so tediously described; but these are found to be more
expensive. The only one which I shall now notice is the process by
which it is obtained from bicyanide of mercury. The bicyanide of
mercury itself is formed when peroxide of mercury is digested with
Prussian blue, the peroxide of mercury abstracting the whole of the
cyanogen from the blue, and leaving the oxides of iron at the bottom of
the vessel. The solution may be evaporated to dryness, and one part of
the salt dissolved in six of water; one part of muriatic acid, sp. gr.
1.15, is then added, and the solution distilled, when the whole of the
hydrocyanic acid passes over, and by being conducted into a solution of
potassa, as in the former process, forms cyanuret of potassium. This
process, though easier than the first described, is rather given as a
resource under peculiar circumstances than as one to be adopted by the
large manufacturer. The expense is the only objection, but in a small
quantity this cannot be a consideration.

“In giving this very rough outline of the general mode of forming
salts, the minutiae necessary for chemical work have altogether been
avoided, and those parts alone are entered upon which are more
immediately necessary for the electro metallurgist to know and practice
for himself. This will account for the long description of the cyanuret
of potassium, while the preparation of the equally important and even
more used acids, the sulphuric, muriatic, etc., commonly found in
commerce, are altogether neglected.

“In using solutions of cyanide of potassium, the workman should not
immerse his arms into them, otherwise it occasionally happens that the
solution produces very troublesome eruptions over the skin.”

HYPOSULPHITE OF SODA.

Hyposulphite of Soda.—This salt forms one of the important chemicals
for the Daguerreotype operator. Its application to this art is of an
interesting nature. It is used to dissolve the sensitive salt of silver
which remains unchanged during the exposure in the camera. It has the
property of readily dissolving the chloride, bromide and iodide of
silver. It should be pure and free from sulphuret of sodium; should
this last be present, it will cause brown spots of sulphurated silver
upon the Daguerreotype impression. This annoyance is a great source of
complaint from many operators, and ever will be, so long as it is
prepared by men who have no reputation to lose, and whose eyes are
blinded by the “Almighty Dollar.”

A good article may be prepared as follows:

“Mix one pound of finely pulverized carbonate of soda with ten ounces
of flowers of sulphur, and heat the mixture slowly in a porcelain dish
till the sulphur melts. Stir the fused mass, so as to expose all its
parts freely to the atmosphere, whereby it passes from the state of a
sulphuret, by the absorption of atmospheric oxygen, into that of a
sulphite, with the phenomenon of very slight incandescence. Dissolve in
water, filter the solution, and boil it immediately along with flowers
of sulphur. The filtered concentrated saline liquid will afford, on
cooling, a large quantity of pure and beautiful crystals of
hyposulphite of soda.”

Hyposulphite of Gold.—This compound salt is by a few considered
preferable to the chloride of gold, but our experience has induced us
to use the latter, believing we are enabled to produce a more brilliant
and warm-toned impression with it. When the hyposulphite of gold is
used in gilding, it requires less heat and a longer application, as
there is some danger of producing a glossy scum over some parts of the
surface of the plate. I prepare this salt as follows:

Dissolve one part chloride of gold and four parts hyposulphite of soda
in equal quantities of distilled water: pour the gold into the
hyposulphite solution, in the same manner as in mixing the gilding
solution; let it stand until it becomes limpid; filter and evaporate to
dryness. Re-dissolve and add a few grains of burnt alum.

After standing a few hours, filter and evaporate again. If not
sufficiently pure, repeat the crystallization until it is so. For
gilding, dissolve in water and use in the same manner as the common
gilding solution.

N.B.—The four following mixtures were employed in Neipce’s process in
his earliest experiments:

Aqueous Solution of Bichloride of Mercury.—Eight grains of bichloride
of mercury in 10,000 grains of distilled water.

Solution of Cyanide of Mercury.—A flask of distilled water is saturated
with cyanide of mercury, and a certain quantity is decanted, which is
diluted with an equal quantity of distilled water.

Acidulated White Oil of Petroleum.—This oil is acidulated by mixing
with it one tenth of pure nitric acid, leaving it for at least 48
hours, occasionally agitating the flask. The oil, which is acidulated,
and which then powerfully reddens litmus paper, is decanted. It is also
a little colored, but remains very limpid.

Solution of Chloride of Gold and Platinum.—In order not to multiply the
solutions, take the ordinary chloride of gold, used for fixing the
impressions, and which is composed of 1 gramme of chloride of gold and
50 grains of hyposulphate of soda, to a quart of distilled water.

With respect to chloride of platinum, 4 grains must be dissolved in 3
quarts of distilled water; these two solutions are mixed in equal
quantities.

Acids.—I shall not go into the preparations of the various acids
employed in the Daguerreotype. This would be useless to the operator,
as there are few, if any, that it would be advisable to prepare. It is
only necessary for the experimenter to be made acquainted with their
properties, and this in order to prevent any haphazard experiments,
which are too common among operators. Any person who may be desirous to
try an experiment, should first study the agents he wishes to employ.
By so doing much time and money will be saved; while the searcher after
new discoveries would rarely become vexed on account of his own
ignorance, or be obliged to avail himself of the experience of others
in any department of science.

Nitric Acid—Exists in combination with the bases, potash, soda, lime,
magnesia, in both the mineral and vegetable kingdoms, and is never
found insoluble. It has the same constituents as common air, but in
different proportions. The strongest nitric acid contains in every
pound, two and a quarter ounces of water. Pure nitric acid is
colorless, with a specific gravity of 1.5, and boiling at 248 deg.. It
is a most powerful oxidizing agent, and is decomposed with more or less
rapidity, by almost all the metals, to which it yields a portion of its
oxygen.

The nitric acid of commerce, is generally the article used by the
Daguerreotypist. This usually contains some chlorine and sulphuric
acid. It is obtained by the distillation of saltpetre with sulphuric
acid. It is employed in the Daguerreotype process for dissolving
silver, preparing chloride or oxide, nitrate of silver, [the former
used in galvanizing,] and in combination with muriatic acid for
preparing chloride of gold, used in gilding. It is also used by some
for preparing the plate.

Acidulated Solution.—This solution is used for cleaning the surface of
the Daguerreotype plate. It has the property of softening the silver,
and bringing it to a state in which it is very susceptible of being
either oxidized or iodized, hence it contributes to increase the
sensibility of the plate. The proportions are to one drop of acid add
from 15 to 20 drops of water, or make the solution about like sharp
vinegar to the taste.

Nitro-Muriatic Acid.—Aqua Regia is a compound menstruum invented by the
alchemists for dissolving gold. It is composed of colorless nitric acid
(aqua-fortis) and ordinary muriatic acid; the mixture is yellow, and
acquires the power of dissolving gold and platinum. These materials are
not properly oxidized; it nearly causes their combination with
chlorine, which is in the Muriatic acid.

Hydrochloric Acid (Muriatic Acid).—This acid forms a valuable addition
to the chemicals employed by the practical Daguerreotypist. This acid
is formed by acting upon common salt (which is chloride of sodium) by
concentrated sulphur