The Project Gutenberg eBook of Child Christopher and Goldilind the Fair
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Child Christopher and Goldilind the Fair

Author: William Morris


        
Release date: July 2, 2008 [eBook #234]

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/234

Credits: Produced by John Hamm and David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHILD CHRISTOPHER AND GOLDILIND THE FAIR ***




Produced by John Hamm





CHILD CHRISTOPHER AND GOLDILIND THE FAIR

by William Morris

1895




CHAPTER I. OF THE KING OF OAKENREALM, AND HIS WIFE AND HIS CHILD.


Of old there was a land which was so much a woodland, that a minstrel
thereof said it that a squirrel might go from end to end, and all about,
from tree to tree, and never touch the earth: therefore was that land
called Oakenrealm.

The lord and king thereof was a stark man, and so great a warrior that
in his youth he took no delight in aught else save battle and tourneys.
But when he was hard on forty years old, he came across a daughter of
a certain lord, whom he had vanquished, and his eyes bewrayed him
into longing, so that he gave back to the said lord the havings he had
conquered of him that he might lay the maiden in his kingly bed. So he
brought her home with him to Oakenrealm and wedded her.

Tells the tale that he rued not his bargain, but loved her so dearly
that for a year round he wore no armour, save when she bade him play in
the tilt-yard for her desport and pride.

So wore the days till she went with child and was near her time, and
then it betid that three kings who marched on Oakenrealm banded them
together against him, and his lords and thanes cried out on him to lead
them to battle, and it behoved him to do as they would.

So he sent out the tokens and bade an hosting at his chief city, and
when all was ready he said farewell to his wife and her babe unborn, and
went his ways to battle once more: but fierce was his heart against the
foemen, that they had dragged him away from his love and his joy.

Even amidst of his land he joined battle with the host of the ravagers,
and the tale of them is short to tell, for they were as the wheat before
the hook. But as he followed up the chase, a mere thrall of the fleers
turned on him and cast his spear, and it reached him whereas his hawberk
was broken, and stood deep in, so that he fell to earth unmighty: and
when his lords and chieftains drew about him, and cunning men strove to
heal him, it was of no avail, and he knew that his soul was departing.
Then he sent for a priest, and for the Marshal of the host, who was a
great lord, and the son of his father's brother, and in few words bade
him look to the babe whom his wife bore about, and if it were a man, to
cherish him and do him to learn all that a king ought to know; and if it
were a maiden, that he should look to her wedding well and worthily: and
he let swear him on his sword, on the edges and the hilts, that he would
do even so, and be true unto his child if child there were: and he bade
him have rule, if so be the lords would, and all the people, till the
child were of age to be king: and the Marshal swore, and all the lords
who stood around bare witness to his swearing. Thereafter the priest
houselled the King, and he received his Creator, and a little while
after his soul departed.

But the Marshal followed up the fleeing foe, and two battles more he
fought before he beat them flat to earth; and then they craved for
peace, and he went back to the city in mickle honour.

But in the King's city of Oakenham he found but little joy; for both
the King was bemoaned, whereas he had been no hard man to his folk; and
also, when the tidings and the King's corpse came back to Oakenrealm,
his Lady and Queen took sick for sorrow and fear, and fell into labour
of her child, and in childing of a man-bairn she died, but the lad
lived, and was like to do well.

So there was one funeral for the slain King and for her whom his slaying
had slain: and when that was done, the little king was borne to the
font, and at his christening he gat to name Christopher.

Thereafter the Marshal summoned all them that were due thereto to come
and give homage to the new king, and even so did they, though he were
but a babe, yea, and who had but just now been a king lying in his
mother's womb. But when the homage was done, then the Marshal called
together the wise men, and told them how the King that was had given him
in charge his son as then unborn, and the ruling of the realm till the
said son were come to man's estate: but he bade them seek one worthier
if they had heart to gainsay the word of their dying lord. Then all they
said that he was worthy and mighty and the choice of their dear lord,
and that they would have none but he.

So then was the great folk-mote called, and the same matter was laid
before all the people, and none said aught against it, whereas no man
was ready to name another to that charge and rule, even had it been his
own self.

Now then by law was the Marshal, who hight Rolf, lord and earl of the
land of Oakenrealm. He ruled well and strongly, and was a fell warrior:
he was well befriended by many of the great; and the rest of them feared
him and his friends: as for the commonalty, they saw that he held the
realm in peace; and for the rest, they knew little and saw less of him,
and they paid to his bailiffs and sheriffs as little as they could, and
more than they would. But whereas that left them somewhat to grind their
teeth on, and they were not harried, they were not so ill content. So
the Marshal throve, and lacked nothing of a king's place save the bare
name.




CHAPTER II. OF THE KING'S SON.


As for the King's son, to whom the folk had of late done homage as king,
he was at first seen about a corner of the High House with his nurses;
and then in a while it was said, and the tale noted, but not much, that
he must needs go for his health's sake, and because he was puny, to some
stead amongst the fields, and folk heard say that he was gone to the
strong house of a knight somewhat stricken in years, who was called Lord
Richard the Lean. The said house was some twelve miles from Oakenham,
not far from the northern edge of the wild-wood. But in a while, scarce
more than a year, Lord Richard brake up house at the said castle, and
went southward through the forest. Of this departure was little said,
for he was not a man amongst the foremost. As for the King's little son,
if any remembered that he was in the hands of the said Lord Richard,
none said aught about it; for if any thought of the little babe at all,
they said to themselves, Never will he come to be king.

Now as for Lord Richard the Lean, he went far through the wood, and
until he was come to another house of his, that stood in a clearing
somewhat near to where Oakenrealm marched on another country, which
hight Meadham; though the said wild-wood ended not where Oakenrealm
ended, but stretched a good way into Meadham; and betwixt one and the
other much rough country there was.

It is to be said that amongst those who went to this stronghold of the
woods was the little King Christopher, no longer puny, but a stout
babe enough: so he was borne amongst the serving men and thralls to
the castle of the Outer March; and he was in no wise treated as a great
man's son; but there was more than one woman who was kind to him, and
as he waxed in strength and beauty month by month, both carle and
quean fell to noting him, and, for as little as he was, he began to be
well-beloved.

As to the stead where he was nourished, though it were far away amongst
the woods, it was no such lonely or savage place: besides the castle and
the houses of it, there was a merry thorpe in the clearing, the houses
whereof were set down by the side of a clear and pleasant little stream.
Moreover the goodmen and swains of the said township were no ill folk,
but bold of heart, free of speech, and goodly of favour; and the women
of them fair, kind, and trusty. Whiles came folk journeying in to
Oakenrealm or out to Meadham, and of these some were minstrels, who had
with them tidings of what was astir whereas folk were thicker in the
world, and some chapmen, who chaffered with the thorpe-dwellers, and
took of them the woodland spoil for such outland goods as those woodmen
needed.

So wore the years, and in Oakenham King Christopher was well nigh
forgotten, and in the wild-wood had never been known clearly for King's
son. At first, by command of Rolf the Marshal, a messenger came
every year from Lord Richard with a letter that told of how the lad
Christopher did. But when five years were worn, the Marshal bade send
him tidings thereof every three years; and by then it was come to the
twelfth year, and still the tidings were that the lad throve ever, and
meanwhile the Marshal sat fast in his seat with none to gainsay, the
word went to Lord Richard that he should send no more, for that he, the
Marshal, had heard enough of the boy; and if he throve it were well, and
if not, it was no worse. So wore the days and the years.




CHAPTER III. OF THE KING OF MEADHAM AND HIS DAUGHTER.


Tells the tale that in the country which lay south of Oakenrealm, and
was called Meadham, there was in these days a king whose wife was dead,
but had left him a fair daughter, who was born some four years after
King Christopher. A good man was this King Roland, mild, bounteous, and
no regarder of persons in his justice; and well-beloved he was of his
folk: yet could not their love keep him alive; for, whenas his daughter
was of the age of twelve years, he sickened unto death; and so, when he
knew that his end drew near, he sent for the wisest of his wise men,
and they came unto him sorrowing in the High House of his chiefest city,
which hight Meadhamstead. So he bade them sit down nigh unto his bed,
and took up the word and spake:

"Masters, and my good lords, ye may see clearly that a sundering is at
hand, and that I must needs make a long journey, whence I shall come
back never; now I would, and am verily of duty bound thereto, that I
leave behind me some good order in the land. Furthermore, I would that
my daughter, when she is of age thereto, should be Queen in Meadham, and
rule the land; neither will it be many years before she shall be of ripe
age for ruling, if ever she may be; and I deem not that there shall be
any lack in her, whereas her mother could all courtesy, and was as wise
as a woman may be. But how say ye, my masters?"

So they all with one consent said Yea, and they would ask for no better
king than their lady his daughter. Then said the King:

"Hearken carefully, for my time is short: Yet is she young and a maiden,
though she be wise. Now therefore do I need some man well looked to of
the folk, who shall rule the land in her name till she be of eighteen
winters, and who shall be her good friend and counsellor into all wisdom
thereafter. Which of you, my masters, is meet for this matter?"

Then they all looked one on the other, and spake not. And the King said:
"Speak, some one of you, without fear; this is no time for tarrying."

Thereon spake an elder, the oldest of them, and said: "Lord, this is
the very truth, that none of us here present are meet for this office:
whereas, among other matters, we be all unmeet for battle; some of us
have never been warriors, and other some are past the age for leading an
host. To say the sooth, King, there is but one man in Meadham who may do
what thou wilt, and not fail; both for his wisdom, and his might afield,
and the account which is had of him amongst the people; and that man is
Earl Geoffrey, of the Southern Marches."

"Ye say sooth," quoth the King; "but is he down in the South, or nigher
to hand?"

Said the elder: "He is as now in Meadhamstead, and may be in this
chamber in scant half an hour." So the King bade send for him, and there
was silence in the chamber till he came in, clad in a scarlet kirtle and
a white cloak, and with his sword by his side. He was a tall man,
bigly made; somewhat pale of face, black and curly of hair; blue-eyed,
thin-lipped, and hook-nosed as an eagle; a man warrior-like, and
somewhat fierce of aspect. He knelt down by the King's bedside, and
asked him in a sorrowful voice what he would, and the King said: "I ask
a great matter of thee, and all these my wise men, and I myself,
withal, deem that thou canst do it, and thou alone--nay, hearken: I am
departing, and I would have thee hold my place, and do unto my people
even what I would do if I myself were living; and to my daughter as
nigh to that as may be. I say all this thou mayst do, if thou wilt be as
trusty and leal to me after I am dead, as thou hast seemed to all men's
eyes to have been while I was living. What sayest thou?"

The Earl had hidden his face in the coverlet of the bed while the King
was speaking; but now he lifted up his face, weeping, and said: "Kinsman
and friend and King; this is nought hard to do; but if it were, yet
would I do it."

"It is well," said the King: "my heart fails me and my voice; so give
heed, and set thine ear close to my mouth: hearken, belike my daughter
Goldilind shall be one of the fairest of women; I bid thee wed her to
the fairest of men and the strongest, and to none other."

Thereat his voice failed him indeed, and he lay still; but he died not,
till presently the priest came to him, and, as he might, houselled him:
then he departed.

As for Earl Geoffrey, when the King was buried, and the homages done to
the maiden Goldilind, he did no worse than those wise men deemed of him,
but bestirred him, and looked full sagely into all the matters of the
kingdom, and did so well therein that all men praised his rule perforce,
whether they loved him or not; and sooth to say he was not much beloved.




CHAPTER IV. OF THE MAIDEN GOLDILIND.


AMIDST of all his other business Earl Geoffrey bethought him in a while
of the dead King's daughter, and he gave her in charge to a gentlewoman,
somewhat stricken in years, a widow of high lineage, but not over
wealthy. She dwelt in her own house in a fair valley some twenty miles
from Meadhamstead: thereabode Goldilind till a year and a half was worn,
and had due observance, but little love, and not much kindness from
the said gentlewoman, who hight Dame Elinor Leashowe. Howbeit, time
and again came knights and ladies and lords to see the little lady, and
kissed her hand and did obeisance to her; yet more came to her in the
first three months of her sojourn at Leashowe than the second, and more
in the second than the third.

At last, on a day when the said year and a half was fully worn, thither
came Earl Geoffrey with a company of knights and men-at-arms, and he did
obeisance, as due was, to his master's daughter, and then spake awhile
privily with Dame Elinor; and thereafter they went into the hall, he,
and she, and Goldilind, and there before all men he spake aloud and
said:

"My Lady Goldilind, meseemeth ye dwell here all too straitly; for
neither is this house of Leashowe great enough for thy state, and the
entertainment of the knights and lords who shall have will to seek to
thee hither; nor is the wealth of thy liege dame and governante as great
as it should be, and as thou, meseemeth, wouldst have it. Wherefore I
have been considering thy desires herein, and if thou deem it meet to
give a gift to Dame Elinor, and live queenlier thyself than now thou
dost, then mayst thou give unto her the Castle of Greenharbour, and the
six manors appertaining thereto, and withal the rights of wild-wood and
fen and fell that lie thereabout. Also, if thou wilt, thou mayst honour
the said castle with abiding there awhile at thy pleasure; and I shall
see to it that thou have due meney to go with thee thither. How sayest
thou, my lady?"

Amongst that company there were two or three who looked at each other
and half smiled; and two or three looked on the maiden, who was
goodly as of her years, as if with compassion; but the more part kept
countenance in full courtly wise.

Then spake Goldilind in a quavering voice (for she was afraid and wise),
and she said: "Cousin and Earl, we will that all this be done; and it
likes me well to eke the wealth of this lady and my good friend Dame
Elinor."

Quoth Earl Geoffrey: "Kneel before thy lady, Dame, and put thine hands
between hers and thank her for the gift." So Dame Elinor knelt down, and
did homage and obeisance for her new land; and Goldilind raised her
up and kissed her, and bade her sit down beside her, and spake to her
kindly; and all men praised the maiden for her gentle and courteous
ways; and Dame Elinor smiled upon her and them, what she could.

She was small of body and sleek; but her cheeks somewhat flagging; brown
eyes she had, long, half opened; thin lips, and chin somewhat falling
away from her mouth; hard on fifty winters had she seen; yet there have
been those who were older and goodlier both.




CHAPTER V. GOLDILIND COMES TO GREENHARBOUR.


But a little while tarried the Earl Geoffrey at Leashowe, but departed
next morning and came to Meadhamstead. A month thereafter came folk from
him to Leashowe, to wit, the new meney for the new abode of Goldilind;
amongst whom was a goodly band of men-at-arms, led by an old lord
pinched and peevish of face, who kneeled to Goldilind as the new
burgreve of Greenharbour; and a chaplain, a black canon, young,
broad-cheeked and fresh-looking, but hard-faced and unlovely; three
new damsels withal were come for the young Queen, not young maids, but
stalworth women, well-grown, and two of them hard-featured; the third,
tall, black-haired, and a goodly-fashioned body.

Now when these were come, who were all under the rule of Dame Elinor,
there was no gainsaying the departure to the new home; and in two days'
time they went their ways from Leashowe. But though Goldilind was young,
she was wise, and her heart misgave her, when she was amidst this new
meney, that she was not riding toward glory and honour, and a world of
worship and friends beloved. Howbeit, whatso might lie before her, she
put a good face upon it, and did to those about her queenly and with all
courtesy.

Five days they rode from Leashowe north away, by thorpe and town and
mead and river, till the land became little peopled, and the sixth day
they rode the wild-wood ways, where was no folk, save now and again the
little cot of some forester or collier; but the seventh day, about
noon, they came into a clearing of the wood, a rugged little plain of
lea-land, mingled with marish, with a little deal of acre-land in barley
and rye, round about a score of poor frame-houses set down scattermeal
about the lea. But on a long ridge, at the northern end of the said
plain, was a grey castle, strong, and with big and high towers, yet
not so much greater than was Leashowe, deemed Goldilind, as for a
dwelling-house.

Howbeit, they entered the said castle, and within, as without, it was
somewhat grim, though nought was lacking of plenishing due for folk
knightly. Long it were to tell of its walls and baileys and chambers;
but let this suffice, that on the north side, toward the thick forest,
was a garden of green-sward and flowers and potherbs; and a garth-wall
of grey stone, not very high, was the only defence thereof toward the
wood, but it was overlooked by a tall tower of the great wall, which
hight the Foresters' Tower. In the said outer garth-wall also was a
postern, whereby there was not seldom coming in and going out.

Now when Goldilind had been in her chamber for a few days, she found out
for certain, what she had before misdoubted, that she had been brought
from Leashowe and the peopled parts near to Meadhamstead unto the
uttermost parts of the realm to be kept in prison there.

Howbeit, it was in a way prison courteous; she was still served with
observance, and bowed before, and called my lady and queen, and so
forth: also she might go from chamber to hall and chapel, to and fro,
yet scarce alone; and into the garden she might go, yet not for the more
part unaccompanied; and even at whiles she went out a-gates, but then
ever with folk on the right hand and the left. Forsooth, whiles and
again, within the next two years of her abode at Greenharbour, out of
gates she went and alone; but that was as the prisoner who strives to be
free (although she had, forsooth, no thought or hope of escape), and as
the prisoner brought back was she chastised when she came within gates
again.

Everywhere, to be short, within and about the Castle of Greenharbour,
did Goldilind meet the will and the tyranny of the little sleek widow,
Dame Elinor, to whom both carle and quean in that corner of the world
were but as servants and slaves to do her will; and the said Elinor, who
at first was but spiteful in word and look toward her lady, waxed worse
as time wore and as the blossom of the King's daughter's womanhood began
to unfold, till at last the she-jailer had scarce feasted any day
when she had not in some wise grieved and tormented her prisoner; and
whatever she did, none had might to say her nay.

But Goldilind took all with a high heart, and her courage grew with
her years, nor would she bow the head before any grief, but took to her
whatsoever solace might come to her; as the pleasure of the sun and the
wind, and the beholding of the greenery of the wood, and the fowl and
the beasts playing, which oft she saw afar, and whiles anear, though
whiles, forsooth, she saw nought of it all, whereas she was shut up
betwixt four walls, and that not of her chamber, but of some bare and
foul prison of the Castle, which, with other griefs, must she needs
thole under the name and guise of penance.

However, she waxed so exceeding fair and sweet and lovely, that the
loveliness of her pierced to the hearts of many of her jailers, so that
some of them, and specially of the squires and men-at-arms, would do her
some easement which they might do unrebuked, or not sorely rebuked;
as bringing her flowers in the spring, or whiles a singing-bird or a
squirrel; and an old man there was of the men-at-arms, who would ask
leave, and get it at whiles, to come to her in her chamber, or the
garden? and tell her minstrel tales and the like for her joyance. Sooth
to say, even the pinched heart of the old Burgreve was somewhat touched
by her; and he alone had any might to stand between her and Dame Elinor;
so that but for him it had gone much harder with her than it did.

For the rest, none entered the Castle from the world without, nay not so
much as a travelling monk, or a friar on his wanderings, save and except
some messenger of Earl Geoffrey who had errand with Dame Elinor or the
Burgreve.

So wore the days and the seasons, till it was now more than four years
since she had left Leashowe, and her eighteenth summer was beginning.

But now the tale leaves telling of Goldilind, and goes back to
the matters of Oakenrealm, and therein to what has to do with King
Christopher and Rolf the Marshal.




CHAPTER VI. HOW ROLF THE MARSHAL DREAMS A DREAM AND COMES TO THE CASTLE
OF THE UTTERMOST MARCH.


Now this same summer, when King Christopher was of twenty years and
two, Rolf the Marshal, sleeping one noontide in the King's garden at
Oakenham, dreamed a dream. For himseemed that there came through the
garth-gate a woman fair and tall, and clad in nought but oaken-leaves,
who led by the hand an exceeding goodly young man of twenty summers, and
his visage like to the last battle-dead King of Oakenrealm when he was a
young man. And the said woman led the swain up to the Marshal, who asked
in his mind what these two were: and the woman answered his thought and
said: "I am the Woman of the Woods, and the Landwight of Oakenrealm; and
this lovely lad whose hand I hold is my King and thy King and the King
of Oakenrealm. Wake, fool--wake! and look to it what thou wilt do!"

And therewith he woke up crying out, and drew forth his sword. But when
he was fully awakened, he was ashamed, and went into the hall, and sat
in his high-seat, and strove to think out of his troubled mind; but for
all he might do, he fell asleep again; and again in the hall he dreamed
as he had dreamed in the garden: and when he awoke from his dream he had
no thought in his head but how he might the speediest come to the house
of Lord Richard the Lean, and look to the matter of his lord's son and
see him with his eyes, and, if it might be, take some measure with the
threat which lay in the lad's life. Nought he tarried, but set off in an
hour's time with no more company than four men-at-arms and an old squire
of his, who was wont to do his bidding without question, whether it were
good or evil.

So they went by frith and fell, by wood and fair ways, till in two days'
time they were come by undern within sight of the Castle of the Outer
March, and entered into the street of the thorpe aforesaid; and they saw
that there were no folk therein and at the house-doors save old carles
and carlines scarce wayworthy, and little children who might not go
afoot. But from the field anigh the thorpe came the sound of shouting
and glad voices, and through the lanes of the houses they saw on the
field many people in gay raiment going to and fro, as though there were
games and sports toward.

Thereof Lord Rolf heeded nought, but went his ways straight to the
Castle, and was brought with all honour into the hall, and thither came
Lord Richard the Lean, hastening and half afeard, and did obeisance to
him; and there were but a few in the hall, and they stood out of earshot
of the two lords.

The Marshal spoke graciously to Lord Richard, and made him sit beside
him, and said in a soft voice: "We have come to see thee, Lord, and how
the folk do in the Uttermost Marches. Also we would wot how it goes with
a lad whom we sent to thee when he was yet a babe, whereas he was some
byblow of the late King, our lord and master, and we deemed thee
both rich enough and kind enough to breed him into thriving without
increasing pride upon him: and, firstly, is the lad yet alive?"

He knitted his brow as he spake, for carefulness of soul; but Lord
Richard smiled upon him, though as one somewhat troubled, and answered:
"Lord Marshal, I thank thee for visiting this poor house; and I shall
tell thee first that the lad lives, and hath thriven marvellously,
though he be somewhat unruly, and will abide no correction now these
last six years. Sooth to say, there is now no story of his being anywise
akin to our late Lord King; though true it is that the folk in this
faraway corner of the land call him King Christopher, but only in a
manner of jesting. But it is no jest wherein they say that they will
gainsay him nought, and that especially the young women. Yet I will say
of him that he is wise, and asketh not overmuch; the more is the sorrow
of many of the maidens. A fell woodsman he is, and exceeding stark, and
as yet heedeth more of valiance than of the love of woman."

The Marshal looked no less troubled than before at these words; he said:
"I would see this young man speedily."

"So shall it be, Lord," said Lord Richard. Therewith he called to him
a squire, and said: "Go thou down into the thorpe, and bring hither
Christopher, for that a great lord is here who would set him to do a
deed of woodcraft, such as is more than the wont of men."

So the squire went his ways, and was gone a little while, and meantime
drew nigh to the hall a sound of triumphing songs and shouts, and right
up to the hall doors; then entered the squire, and by his side came a
tall young man, clad but in a white linen shirt and deerskin brogues,
his head crowned with a garland of flowers: him the squire brought up to
the lords on the dais, and louted to them, and said: "My lords, I bring
you Christopher, and he not overwilling, for now hath he been but just
crowned king of the games down yonder; but when the carles and queans
there said that they would come with him and bear him company to the
hall doors, then, forsooth, he yea-said the coming. It were not unmeet
that some shame were done him."

"Peace, man!" said Lord Richard, "what hath this to do with thee? Seest
thou not the Lord Marshal here?" The Lord Rolf sat and gazed on the lad,
and scowled on him; but Christopher saw therein nought but the face of
a great lord burdened with many cares; so when he had made his obeisance
he stood up fearlessly and merrily before them.

Sooth to say, he was full fair to look on: for all his strength, which,
as ye shall hear, was mighty, all the fashion of his limbs and his body
was light and clean done, and beauteous; and though his skin, where it
showed naked, was all tanned with the summer, it was fine and sleek and
kindly, every deal thereof: bright-eyed and round-cheeked he was, with
full lips and carven chin, and his hair golden brown of hue, and curling
crisp about the blossoms of his garland.

So must we say that he was such an youngling as most might have been in
the world, had not man's malice been, and the mischief of grudging and
the marring of grasping.

But now spake Lord Rolf: "Sir varlet, they tell me that thou art a
mighty hunter, and of mickle guile in woodcraft; wilt thou then hunt
somewhat for me, and bring me home a catch seldom seen?"

"Yea, Lord King," said Christopher, "I will at least do my best, if thou
but tell me where to seek the quarry and when."

"It is well," said the Marshal, "and to-morrow my squire, whom thou
seest yonder, and who hight Simon, shall tell thee where the hunt is up,
and thou shalt go with him. But hearken! thou shalt not call me king;
for to-day there is no king in Oakenrealm, and I am but Marshal, and
Earl of the king that shall be."

The lad fell a-musing for a minute, and then he said: "Yea, Lord
Marshal, I shall do thy will: but meseemeth I have heard some tale of
one who was but of late king in Oakenrealm: is it not so, Lord?"

"Stint thy talk, young man," cried the Marshal in a harsh voice, "and
abide to-morrow; who knoweth who shall be king, and whether thou or I
shall live to see him."

But as he spake the words they seemed to his heart like a foretelling
of evil, and he turned pale and trembled, and said to Christopher: "Come
hither, lad; I will give thee a gift, and then shalt thou depart till
to-morrow." So Christopher drew near to him, and the Marshal pulled off
a ring from his finger and set it on the lad's, and said to him: "Now
depart in peace;" and Christopher bent the knee to him and thanked him
for the gracious gift of the ruler of Oakenrealm, and then went his ways
out of the hall, and the folk without gave a glad cry as he came amongst
them.

But by then he was come to the door, Lord Rolf looked on his hand, and
saw that, instead of giving the youngling a finger-ring which he had
bought of a merchant for a price of five bezants, as he had meant to
do, he had given him a ring which the old King had had, whereon was the
first letter of his name (Christopher to wit), and a device of a crowned
rose, for this ring was a signet of his. Wherefore was the Marshal once
more sore troubled, and he arose, and was half minded to run down the
hall after Christopher; but he refrained him, and presently smiled
to himself, and then fell a-talking to Lord Richard, sweetly and
pleasantly.

SO wore the day to evening; but, ere he went to bed, the Lord Rolf had
a privy talk, first with Lord Richard, and after with his squire Simon.
What followed of that talk ye may hear after.




CHAPTER VII. HOW CHRISTOPHER WENT A JOURNEY INTO THE WILD-WOOD.


Next morning Christopher, who slept in the little hall of the inner
court of the Castle, arose betimes, and came to the great gate; but, for
as early as he was, there he saw the squire Simon abiding him, standing
between two strong horses; to him he gave the sele of the day, and the
squire greeted him, but in somewhat surly wise. Then he said to him:
"Well, King Christopher, art thou ready for the road?"

"Yea, as thou seest," said the youngling smiling. For, indeed, he had
breeches now beneath his shirt, and a surcoat of green woollen over it;
boots of deerskin had he withal, and spurs thereon: he was girt with a
short sword, and had a quiver of arrows at his back, and bare a great
bow in his hand.

"Yea," quoth Simon, "thou deemest thee a gay swain belike; but thou
lookest likelier for a deerstealer than a rider, thou, hung up to thy
shooting-gear. Deemest thou we go a-hunting of the hind?"

Quoth Christopher: "I wot not, squire; but the great lord who lieth
sleeping yonder, hath told me that thou shouldest give me his errand;
and of some hunting or feat of wood-craft he spake. Moreover, this
crooked stick can drive a shaft through matters harder than a hind's
side."

Simon looked confused, and he reddened and stammered somewhat as he
answered: "Ah, yea: so it was; I mind me; I will tell thee anon."

Said Christopher: "Withal, squire, if we are wending into the wood, as
needs we must, unless we ride round about this dale in a ring all day,
dost thou deem we shall go at a gallop many a mile? Nay, fair sir; the
horses shall wend a foot's pace oftenest, and we shall go a-foot not
unseldom through the thickets."

Now was Simon come to himself again, and that self was surly, so he
said: "Ay, ay, little King, thou deemest thee exceeding wise in these
woods, dost thou not? and forsooth, thou mayst be. Yet have I tidings
for thee."

"Yea, and what be they?" said Christopher.

Simon grinned: "Even these," said he, "that Dr. Knowall was no man's
cousin while he lived, and that he died last week."

Therewith he swung himself into his saddle, and Christopher laughed
merrily at his poor gibe and mounted in like wise.

Wherewithal they rode their ways through the thorpe, and at the southern
end thereof Simon drew rein, and looked on Christopher as if he would
ask him something, but asked not. Then said Christopher: "Whither go we
now?"

Said Simon: "It is partly for thee to say: hearken, I am bidden first to
ride the Redwater Wood with thee: knowest thou that?"

"Yea," said the lad, "full well: but which way shall we ride it? Wilt
thou come out of it at Redwater Head, or Herne Moss, or the Long Pools?"

Said Simon: "We shall make for the Long Pools, if thou canst bring me
there."

Christopher laughed: "Aha!" said he, "then am I some faraway cousin
of Dr. Knowall when the whole tale is told: forsooth I can lead thee
thither; but tell me, what shall I do of valiant deeds at the Long
Pools? for there is no fire-drake nor effit, nay, nor no giant, nor
guileful dwarf, nought save mallard and coot, heron and bittern; yea,
and ague-shivers to boot."

Simon looked sourly on him and said: "Thou are bidden to go with me,
young man, or gainsay the Marshal. Art thou mighty enough thereto? For
the rest, fear not but that the deed shall come to thee one day."

"Nay," said Christopher, "it is all one to me, for I am at home in these
woods and wastes, I and my shafts. Tell me of the deeds when thou
wilt." But indeed he longed to know the deed, and fretted him because of
Simon's surliness and closeness. Then he said: "Well, Squire Simon, let
us to the road; for thou shalt know that to-night we must needs house us
under the naked heaven; in nowise can we come to the Long Pools before
to-morrow morning."

"Yea, and why not?" said the squire; "I have lain in worse places."

"Wilt thou tell me thereof?" said Christopher.

"Mayhappen," said Simon, "if to-morrow comes and goes for both of us
twain."

So they rode their ways through the wood, and baited at midday with what
Simon bare in his saddle-bags, and then went on till night fell on them;
then asked Simon how long they were from the Long Pools, and Christopher
told him that they were yet short of them some fifteen miles, and those
long ones, because of the marish grounds. So they tethered their horses
there and ate their supper; and lay down to sleep in the house of the
woods, by a fire-side which they lighted.

But in the midnight Christopher, who was exceeding fine-eared, had an
inkling of someone moving afoot anigh him, and he awoke therewith, and
sprang up, his drawn short-sword in his hand, and found himself face to
face with Simon, and he also with his sword drawn. Simon sprang aback,
but held up his sword-point, and Christopher, not yet fully awake, cried
out: "What wouldst thou? What is it?"

Simon answered, stammering and all abashed: "Didst thou not hear then?
it wakened me."

"I heard nought," said Christopher; "what was it?"

"Horses going in the wood," said Simon

"Ah, yea," said Christopher, "it will have been the wild colts and the
mares; they harbour about these marsh-land parts. Go to sleep again,
neighbour, the night is not yet half worn; but I will watch a while."

Then Simon sheathed his sword, and turned about and stood uneasily a
little while, and then cast him down as one who would sleep hastily;
but slept not forsooth, though he presently made semblance of it: as for
Christopher, he drew together the brands of the fire, and sat beside it
with his blade over his knees, until the first beginning of the summer
dawn was in the sky; then he began to nod, and presently lay aback and
slept soundly. Simon slept not, but durst not move. So they lay till it
was broad day, and the sunbeams came thrusting through the boughs of the
thicket.




CHAPTER VIII. CHRISTOPHER COMES TO THE TOFTS.


When they arose in the sunshine, Simon went straightway to see to the
horses, while Christopher stayed by the fire to dight their victuals;
he was merry enough, and sang to himself the while; but when Simon came
back again, Christopher looked on him sharply, but for a while Simon
would not meet his eye, though he asked divers questions of him
concerning little matters, as though he were fain to hear Christopher's
voice; at last he raised his eyes, and looked on him steadily, and then
Christopher said: "Well, wayfarer mine, and whither away this morning?"

Said Simon: "As thou wottest, to the Long Pools."

Said the lad: "Well, thou keepest thy tidings so close, that I will ask
thee no more till we come to the Long Pools; since there, forsooth,
thou must needs tell me; unless we sunder company there, whereof I were
nought grieving."

"Mayhappen thou shalt fare a long way to-day," muttered Simon.

But the lad cried out aloud, while his eye glittered and his cheek
flushed: "Belike thou hadst well-nigh opened the door thereto last
night!" And therewith he leapt to his feet and drew his short-sword, and
with three deft strokes sheared asunder an overhanging beech-bough as
thick as a man's wrist, that it fell crashing down, and caught Simon
amongst the fall of its leafy twigs, while Christopher stood laughing
on him, but with a dangerous lofty look in his eyes: then he turned away
quietly toward the horses and mounted his nag, and Simon followed and
did the like, silently; crestfallen he looked, with brooding fierceness
in his face.

So they rode their ways, and spake but little each to each till they
came to where the trees of the wood thinned speedily, and gave out at
last at the foot of a low stony slope but little grassed; and when they
had ridden up to the brow and could see below, Christopher stretched
out his hand, and said: "Lo thou the Long Pools, fellow wayfarer! and lo
some of the tramping; horses that woke thee and not me last night."

Forsooth there lay below them a great stretch of grass, which whiles
ran into mere quagmire, and whiles was sound and better grassed; and
the said plain was seamed by three long shallow pools, with, as it were,
grassy causeways between them, grown over here and there with ancient
alder trees; but the stony slope whereon they had reined up bent round
the plain mostly to the east, as though it were the shore of a great
water; and far away to the south the hills of the forest rose up blue,
and not so low at the most, but that they were somewhat higher than
the crest of the White Horse as ye may see it from the little Berkshire
hills above the Thames. Down on the firm greensward there was indeed a
herd of wild horses feeding; mallard and coot swam about the waters; the
whimbrel laughed from the bent-sides, and three herons stood on the side
of the causeway seeking a good fishing-stead.

Simon sat a-horseback looking askance from the marish to Christopher,
and said nothing a while; then he spake in a low croaking voice, and
said: "So, little King, we have come to the Long Pools; now I will ask
thee, hast thou been further southward than this marish land?"

"That have I," said the lad, "a day's journey further; but according to
the tales of men it was at the peril of my life."

Simon seemed as if he had not noted his last word; he said: "Well then,
since thou knowest the wild and the wood, knowest thou amidst of the
thickets there, two lumps of bare hills, like bowls turned bottom up,
that rise above the trees, and on each a tower, and betwixt them a long
house."

"Save us, Allhallows!" quoth Christopher, "but thou wilt mean the Tofts!
Is it so, sir squire?"

"Even so," said Simon.

"And thou knowest what dwellest there, and wouldst have me lead thee
thither?" said the lad.

"I am so bidden," said Simon; "if thou wilt not do my bidding, seek thou
some place to hide thee in from the hand of the Earl Marshal."

Said the youngling: "Knowest thou not Jack of the Tofts and his seven
sons, and what he is, and that he dwelleth there?"

Said Simon: "I know of him; yea, and himself I know, and that he
dwelleth there; and I wot that men call him an outlaw, and that many
rich men shall lack ere he lacks. What then?"

"This," said Christopher, "that, as all tales tell, he will take my life
if I ride thither. And," said he, turning to Simon, "this is belike what
thou wouldest with me?" And therewith he drew out his sword, for his bow
was unstrung.

But Simon sat still and let his sword abide, and said, sourly enough:
"Thou art a fool to think I am training thee to thy death by him; for I
have no will to die, and why shall he not slay me also? Now again I say
unto thee, thou hast the choice, either to lead me to the Tofts, where
shall be the deed for thee to do, or to hide thee in some hole, as I
said afore, from the vengeance of the Lord of Oakenrealm. But as for thy
sword, thou mayst put it up, for I will not fight with thee, but rather
let thee go with a string to thy leg, if thou wilt not be wise and do as
thy lords ordain for thee."

Christopher sheathed his sword, and a smile came into his face, as if
some new thought were stirring in him, and he said: "Well, since thou
wilt not fight with me, and I but a lad, I will e'en do thy will and
thine errand to Jack of the Tofts. Maybe he is not so black as he is
painted, and not all tales told of him are true. But some of them I will
tell thee as we ride along."

"And some thereof I know already, O woodland knight," said Simon,
as they rode down the bent, and Christopher led on toward the green
causeway betwixt the waters. "Tell me," quoth he, when they had ridden
awhile, "is this one of thy tales, how Jack of the Tofts went to the
Yule feast of a great baron in the guise of a minstrel, and, even as
they bore in the boar's head, smote the said baron on the neck, so that
his head lay by the head of the swine on the Christmas board?"

"Yea," said Christopher, "and how Jack cried out: 'Two heads of swine,
one good to eat, one good to burn.' But, my master, thou shalt know that
this manslaying was not for nought: whereas the Baron of Greenlake had
erewhile slain Jack's father in felon wise, where he could strike no
stroke for life; and two of his brethren also had he slain, and made the
said Jack an outlaw, and he all sackless. In the Uttermost March we deem
that he had a case against the baron."

"Hah!" said Simon. "Is this next tale true, that this Jack o' the Tofts
slew a good knight before the altar, so that the priest's mass-hackle
was all wet with his blood, whereas the said priest was in the act of
putting the holy body into the open mouth of the said knight?"

Christopher said eagerly: "True was it, by the Rood! and well was it
done, for that same Sir Raoul was an ugly traitor, who had knelt down
where he died to wed the Body of the Lord to a foul lie in his mouth;
whereas the man who knelt beside him he had trained to his destruction,
and was even then doing the first deal of his treason by forswearing him
there."

"And that man who knelt with him there," said Simon, "what betid to
him?"

Said Christopher: "He went out of the church with Jack of the Tofts that
minute of the stroke; and to the Tofts he went with him, and abode with
him freely: and a valiant man he was...and is."

"Hah!" said Simon again. "And then there is this: that the seven sons
of Jack of the Tofts bore off perforce four fair maidens of gentle blood
from the castle wherein they dwelt, serving a high dame in all honour;
and that moreover, they hanged the said dame over the battlements of her
own castle. Is this true, fair sir?"

"True is it as the gospel," said Christopher: "yet many say that the
hanged dame had somewhat less than her deserts; for a foul & cruel whore
had she been; and had done many to be done to death, and stood by while
they were pined. And the like had she done with those four damsels, had
there not been the stout sons of Jack of the Tofts; so that the dear
maidens were somewhat more than willing to be borne away."

Simon grinned: "Well, lad," said he, "I see that thou knowest Jack of
the Tofts even better than I do; so why in the devil's name thou art
loth to lead me to him, I wot not."

Christopher reddened, and held his peace awhile; then he said: "Well
fellow-farer, at least I shall know something of him ere next midnight."

"Yea," said Simon, "and shall we not come to the Tofts before
nightfall?"

"Let us essay it," said Christopher, "and do our best, it yet lacketh
three hours of noon." Therewith he spurred on, for the greensward was
hard under the hooves, and they had yet some way to go before they
should come amongst the trees and thickets.

Into the said wood they came, and rode all day diligently, but night
fell on them before they saw either house or man or devil; then said
Simon: "Why should we go any further before dawn? Will it not be best to
come to this perilous house by daylight?"

Said Christopher: "There be perils in the wood as well as in the house.
If we lie down here, maybe Jack's folk may come upon us sleeping, and
some mischance may befall us. Withal, hereabout be no wild horses to
wake thee and warn thee of thy foeman anigh. Let us press on; there is
a moon, though she be somewhat hidden by clouds, and meseemeth the way
lieth clear before me; neither are we a great way from the Tofts."

Then Simon rode close up to Christopher, and took his rein and stayed
him, and said to him, as one who prayeth: "Young man, willest thou my
death?"

"That is as it may be," said Christopher; "willest thou mine?"

Simon held his peace awhile, and Christopher might not see what was in
his face amidst the gathering dusk; but he twitched his rein out of the
squire's hand, as if he would hasten onward; then the squire said: "Nay,
I pray thee abide and hear a word of me."

"Speak then," said Christopher, "but hasten, for I hunger, and I would
we were in the hall." And therewith he laughed.

Said Simon: "Thus it is: if I go back to my lord and bear no token of
having done his errand to Jack of the Tofts, then am I in evil case; and
if I come to the Tofts, I wot well that Jack is a man fierce of heart,
and ready of hand: now, therefore, I pray thee give me thy word to be my
warrant, so far as thou mayst be, with this woodman and his sons."

At that word Christopher brake out a-laughing loudly, till all the dusk
wood rang with the merry sound of his fresh voice; at last he said:
"Well, well, thou art but a craven to be a secret murderer: the Lord God
would have had an easy bargain of Cain, had he been such as thou. Come
on, and do thine errand to Jack of the Tofts, and I will hold thee
harmless, so far as I may. Though, sooth to say, I guessed what thine
errand was, after the horses waked thee and put a naked sword in thine
hand last night. Marry! I had no inkling of it when we left the Castle
yesterday morning, but deemed thy lord needed me to do him some service.
Come on then! or rather go thou on before me a pace; there, where thou
seest the glimmer betwixt the beech-trees yonder; if thou goest astray,
I am anigh thee for a guide. And I say that we shall not go far without
tidings."

Simon went on perforce, as he was bidden, and they rode thus a while
slowly, Christopher now and then crying, as they went: "To the right,
squire! To the left! Straight on now!" and so on. But suddenly they
heard voices, and it was as if the wood had all burst out into fire, so
bright a light shone out. Christopher shouted, and hastened on to pass
Simon, going quite close to his right side thereby, and as he did so, he
saw steel flashing in his hand, and turned sidling to guard him, but
ere he could do aught Simon drave a broad dagger into his side, and then
turned about and fled the way they had come, so far as he knew how.

Christopher fell from his horse at once as the stroke came home, but
straightway therewith were there men with torches round about him, a
dozen of them; men tall and wild-looking in the firelight; and one
of them, a slim young man with long red hair falling all about his
shoulders, knelt down by him, while the others held his horse and gat
his feet out of the stirrups.

The red-head laid his hand on his breast, and raised his head up till
the light of a torch fell on it, and then he cried out: "Masters, here
hath been a felon; the man hath been sticked, and the deed hath to do
with us; for lo you, this is none other than little Christopher of the
Uttermost March, who stumbled on the Tofts last Yule, and with whom we
were so merry together. Here, thou Robert of Maisey, do thy leechdom on
him if he be yet living; but if he be dead, or dieth of his hurt, then
do I take the feud on me, to follow it to the utmost against the slayer;
even I, David the Red, though I be the youngest of the sons of Jack of
the Tofts. For this man I meant should be my fellow in field and fell,
ganging and galloping, in hall and high-place, in cot and in choir,
before woman and warrior, and priest and proud-prince. Now thou Robert,
how does he?"

Said the man who had looked to Christopher's wound, and had put aside
his coat and shirt: "He is sore hurt, but meseemeth not deadly. Nay,
belike he may live as long as thou, or longer, whereas thou wilt ever be
shoving thy red head and lank body wheresoever knocks are going."

David rose with a sigh of one who is lightened of a load, and said:
"Well Robert, when thou hast bound his wound let us have him into the
house: Ho lads! there is light enough to cut some boughs and make a
litter for him. But, ho again! has no one gone after the felon to take
him?"

Robert grinned up from his job with the hurt man: "Nay, King David,"
said he, "it is mostly thy business; mayhappen thou wilt lay thy heels
on thy neck and after him."

The red-head stamped on the ground, and half drew his sax, and shoved
it back again unto the sheath, and then said angrily: "I marvel at thee,
Robert, that thou didst not send a man or two at once after the felon:
how may I leave my comrade and sweet board-fellow lying hurt in the
wild-wood? Art thou growing over old for our woodland ways, wherein
loitering bringeth louting?"

Robert chuckled and said: "I thought thou wouldst take the fly in thy
mouth, foster-son: if the felon escape Ralph Longshanks and Anthony
Green, then hath he the devil's luck; and they be after him."

"That is well," said the young man, "though I would I were with them."
And therewith he walked up and down impatiently, while the others were
getting ready the litter of boughs.

At last it was done, and Christopher laid thereon, and they all went
on together through the woodland path, the torches still flaring about
them. Presently they came out into a clearing of the wood, and lo,
looming great and black before them against the sky, where the moon had
now broken out of the clouds somewhat, the masses of the tofts, and at
the top of the northernmost of them a light in the upper window of a
tall square tower. Withal the yellow-litten windows of a long house
showed on the plain below the tofts; but little else of the house might
be seen, save that, as they drew near, the walls brake out in doubtful
light here and there as the torches smote them.

So came they to a deep porch, where they quenched all the torches save
one, and entered a great hall through it, David and two other tall young
men going first, and Robert Maisey going beside the bier. The said hall
was lighted with candles, but not very brightly, save at the upper end;
but amidmost a flickering heap of logs sent a thin line of blue smoke up
to the luffer. There were some sixty folk in the hall, scattered about
the end-long tables, a good few of whom were women, well grown and
comely enough, so far as could be seen under the scanty candle-light.
At the high-table, withal, were sitting both men and women, and as they
drew near to the greater light of it, there could be seen in the chief
seat a man, past middle age, tall, wide-shouldered and thin-flanked,
with a short peaked beard and close-cut grizzled hair; he was high of
cheekbones, thin-faced, with grey eyes, both big and gentle-looking; he
was clad in a green coat welted with gold. Beside him sat a woman, tall
and big-made, but very fair of face, though she were little younger,
belike, than the man. Out from these two sat four men and four women,
man by man and woman by woman, on either side of the high-seat. Of the
said men, one was of long red hair as David, and like to him in
all wise, but older; the others were of like fashion to him in the
high-seat. Shortly to say it, his sons they were, as David and the two
young men with him. The four women who sat with these men were all fair
and young, and one of them, she who drank out of the red-head's cup, so
fair, and with such a pleasant slim grace, that her like were not easy
to be found.

Again, to shorten the tale, there in the hall before Christopher, who
lay unwotting, were Jack of the Tofts and his seven sons, and the four
wives of four of the same, whom they had won from the Wailful Castle,
when they, with their father, put an end to the evil woman, and the
great she-tyrant of the Land betwixt the Wood and the River.

Now when David and his were come up to the dais, they stayed them,
and their father spake from his high-seat and said: "What is to do, ye
three? and what catch have ye?"

Said David: "I would fain hope 'tis the catch of a life that or I love;
for here is come thy guest of last Yule, even little Christopher, who
wrestled with thee and threw thee after thou hadst thrown all of us, and
he lying along and hurt, smitten down by a felon hard on our very doors.
What will ye do with him?"

"What," said Jack of the Tofts, "but tend him and heal him and cherish
him. And when he is well, then we shall see. But where is the felon who
smote him?"

Said David: "He fled away a-horseback ere we came to the field of deed,
and Anthony Green and Ralph Longshanks are gone after him, and belike,
will take him."

"Mayhappen not," said the master. "Now, forsooth, I have an inkling of
what this may mean; whereas there can be but one man whose business
may be the taking of our little guest's life. But let all be till he
be healed and may tell us his tale; and, if he telleth it as I deem
he will, then shall we seek further tidings. Meanwhile, if ye take the
felon, keep him heedfully till I may see him; for then may I have a true
tale out of him, even before Christopher is hale again."

So therewith David and Robert, with two or three others, brought
Christopher to a chamber, and did what leechdoms to him they might;
but Jack of the Tofts, and his sons and their fair wives, and his other
folk, made merry in the hall of the Tofts.




CHAPTER IX. SQUIRE SIMON COMES BACK TO OAKENHAM. THE EARL MARSHAL TAKEN
TO KING IN OAKENREALM.


Now as to Squire Simon, whether the devil helped him, or his luck, or
were it his own cunning and his, horse's stoutness, we wot not; but in
any case he fell not in with Ralph Longshanks and Anthony Green, but
rode as far and as fast as his horse would go, and then lay down in the
wild-wood; and on the morrow arose and went his ways, and came in the
even to the Castle of the Uttermost March, and went on thence the morrow
after on a fresh horse to Oakenham. There he made no delay but went
straight to the High House, and had privy speech of the Earl Marshal;
and him he told how he had smitten Christopher, and, as he deemed, slain
him. The Earl Marshal looked on him grimly and said: "Where is the ring
then?"

"I have it not," said Simon. "How might I light down to take it, when
the seven sons were hard on us?" And therewith he told him all the tale,
and how he had risen to slay Christopher the even before; and how he had
found out after that the youngling had become guest and fosterling of
the folk of the Tofts; and how warily Christopher had ridden, so that
he, Simon, had had to do his best at the last moment. "And now, Lord,"
quoth he, "I see that it will be my luck to have grudging of thee, or
even worse it may be; yea, or thou wilt be presently telling me that
I am a liar and never struck the stroke: but I warrant me that by
this time Jack of the Tofts knoweth better, for I left my knife in the
youngling's breast, and belike he wotteth of my weapons. Well, then, if
thou wilt be quit of me, thou hast but to forbear upholding me against
the Toft folk, and then am I gone without any to-do of thee."

Earl Rolf spake quietly in answer, though his face was somewhat
troubled: "Nay, Simon, I doubt thee not, not one word; for why shouldest
thou lie to me? nor do I deem thou wouldest, for thou art trusty and
worthy. Yet sore I doubt if the child be dead. Well, even so let it be,
for I am alive; and full surely I am mightier than Jack of the Tofts,
both to uphold thee against him (wherein I shall not fail), and
otherwise. But may God make me even as that young man if I be not
mightier yet in a few days. But now do thou go and eat and drink and
take thy disport; for thou hast served me well; and in a little while I
shall make thee knight and lord, and do all I can to pleasure thee."

So then Simon knelt to the Earl and made obeisance to him, and arose and
went his ways, light-hearted and merry.

But within the month it so befel that some of the lords and dukes came
to the Earl Marshal, and prayed him to call together a great Folk-mote
of all Oakenrealm; and he answered them graciously, and behight them to
do as they would; and even so did he.

And that Mote was very great, and whenas it was hallowed, there arose
a great lord, grey and ancient, and bewailed him before the folk, that
they had no king over Oakenrealm to uphold the laws & ward the land; and
"Will ye live bare and kingless for ever?" said he at last. "Will ye
not choose you a king, and crown him, before I die, and we others of the
realm who are old and worn?" Then he sat down, and another arose, and in
plain terms he bade them take the Earl Marshal to king. And then arose
one after other, and each sang the same song, till the hearts of the
people grew warm with the big words, and at first many, and then more
cried out: "A King, a King! The Earl Marshal for King! Earl Rolf for
King!" So that at last the voices rose into a great roar, and sword
clashed on shield, and they who were about the Earl turned to him and
upraised him on a great war-shield, and he stood thereon above the folk
with a naked sword in his hand, and all the folk shouted about him.

Thereafter the chiefs and all the mightiest came and did homage to him
for King of Oakenrealm as he sat on the Hill of the Folk-mote: and that
night there was once more a King of Oakenrealm, and Earl Rolf was no
more, but King Rolf ruled the people.

But now the tale leaves telling of him, and turns again to Christopher
the woodman, who lay sick of his hurt in the House of the Tofts.




CHAPTER X. OF CHRISTOPHER AT THE TOFTS.


Christopher was six weeks ere he could come and go as he was wont; but
it was but a few days ere he was well enough to tell his tale to Jack of
the Tofts and his seven bold sons; and they cherished him and made
much of him, and so especially did David, the youngest son, to his
board-fellow and troth-brother.

On a day when he was well-nigh whole, as he sat under an oak-tree nigh
the house, in the cool of the evening, Jack of the Tofts came to him and
sat beside him, and made him tell his tale to him once more, and when he
was done he said to him: "Foster-son, for so I would have thee deem of
thyself, what is the thing that thou rememberest earliest in thy days?"

Said Christopher: "A cot without the Castle walls at the Uttermost
Marches, and a kind woman therein, big, sandy-haired, and freckled, and
a lad that was white-haired and sturdy, somewhat bigger than I. And
I mind me standing up against the door-post of the cot and seeing
men-at-arms riding by in white armour, and one of them throwing an apple
to me, and I raised my arm to throw it back at him, but my nurse (for
somehow I knew she was not my mother) caught my hand and drew me back
indoors, and I heard the men laughing behind me. And then a little after
my nurse took me into the Castle court, and there was again the man who
had thrown me the apple, sitting on a bench therein, clad in a scarlet
gown furred with brown fur; and she led me up to him, and he stooped
down and chucked me under the chin and put his hand on my head, and
looked at my nurse and said: 'Yea, he is a big lad, and groweth apace,
whereas he is but of six winters.' 'Nay, Lord,' said my nurse, 'he is
but scantly five.' He knit his brows and said: 'Nay, I tell thee he is
six.' She shook her head, but said nought, and the great man scowled on
her and said: 'Mistress, wilt thou set thy word against mine? Know now
that this child is of six years. Now then, how old is he?' She said
faintly: 'Six years.' Said he: 'Look to it that thy head and thy mouth
forget it not, else shall we make thy back remember it.' Then he put his
hand on my head again, and said: 'Well, I say thou art a big lad for six
years;' and therewith he gave me a silver penny; and even as he spake,
came up a grey-clad squire to him and looked on me curiously. Then I
went away with my nurse, and wondered why she was grown so pale, whereas
she was mostly red-cheeked and jolly. But when she had brought me into
the cot again, she kissed me and clipped me, weeping sorely the while;
wherefore I wept, though I knew not why. Sithence, I soon came to know
that the man was the lord and governor of the Castle, as ye may well
wot; but to this hour I know not what he meant by threatening my nurse."

Said Jack: "And how old art thou now, Christopher mine?"

Said the youngling, laughing: "By my lord the Castellan's reckoning I am
twenty and two years; but if thou wilt trow my good and kind nurse, that
yet liveth a kind dame, thou must take twelve months off the tale."

Jack sat silent a little; then he laughed and said: "Well, thou art a
mickle babe, Christopher, and it may be that one day many a man shall
know it. But now tell me again; thou hadst said to me before that thou
hast known neither father nor mother, brother nor sisters: is it so,
verily?"

Said Christopher: "Never a kinsman of blood have I, though many
well-wishers."

Said Jack: "Well, now hast thou father and mother, brethren and sisters,
though they be of the sort of man-slayers and strong-thieves and
outlaws; yet they love thee, lad, and thou mayst one day find out how
far thou mayst trust them."

Christopher nodded and smiled at him merrily; then he fell silent
awhile, and the outlaw sat looking on him; at last he said suddenly:
"Foster-father, tell me what I am, and of what kindred, I pray thee;
for, methinks, thou knowest thereof; and what wonder, wise man as thou
art."

"Forsooth, son Christopher, I have a deeming thereof, or somewhat more,
and when it is waxen greater yet, I will tell it thee one day, but not
now. But hearken! for I have other tidings for thee. Thou art now whole
and strong, and in a few days thou mayst wend the wild-wood as stoutly
as e'er a one of us. Now, therefore, how sayest thou, if I bid thee fare
a two days' journey with David and Gilbert thy brethren, and thy sister
Joanna, till they bring thee to a fair little stead which I call mine
own, to dwell there awhile? For, meseemeth, lad, that the air of the
Tofts here may not be overwholesome unto thee."

Christopher reddened, and he half rose up, and said: "What is this,
foster-father? Is it that there shall be battle at the Tofts, and that
thou wouldst have me away thence? Am I then such a weakling?"

Said Jack, laughing: "Be still now, thou sticked one. The Tofts go down
to battle at some whiles; but seldom comet battle to the Tofts; and no
battle do I look for now. But do my bidding, sweet fosterling, and it
will be better for me and better for thee, and may, perchance, put off
battle for awhile; which to me as now were not unhandy. If thou wilt
but abide at Littledale for somewhile, there shall be going and coming
betwixt us, and thou shalt drink thy Yule at the Tofts, and go back
afterwards, and ever shalt thou have thy sweet fellows with thee; so be
wise, since thou goest not perforce."

"Yea, yea," said Christopher, laughing; "thou puttest force on no man,
is it not so, foster-father? Wherefore I will go, and uncompelled."

Therewith came up to them, from out of the wild-wood, David, and with
him Joanna, who was the wife of Gilbert, and one of those fair maidens
from the Wailful Castle, though not the fairest of them; they had been
a-hunting, for ever those three would willingly go together, Gilbert,
David, and Joanna; and now Gilbert had abided behind, to dight the
quarry for fetching home. Christopher looked on the two joyfully, as a
man getting whole after sickness smiles on goodly things; and Joanna was
fair to see in her hunter's attire, with brogues tied to her naked feet,
and the shapeliness of her legs bare to the knee beneath the trussing up
of her green skirts.

They greeted Christopher kindly, and Joanna sat down by him to talk,
but Jack of the Tofts took his son by the arm, and went toward the house
with him in earnest speech.




CHAPTER XI. HOW CHRISTOPHER CAME TO LITTLEDALE TO ABIDE THERE A WHILE.


In about a week's time from this, those four fellows went their ways
southward from the Tofts, having with them four good nags and four
sumpter beasts laden with such things as they needed, whereof were
weapons enough, though they all, save Christopher, bare bows; and he
and the others were girt with swords, and a leash of good dogs followed
them. Two milch kine also they drave with them.

Merry they were all as they went their ways through the woods, but the
gladness of Christopher was even past words; wherefore, after a little,
he spake scarce at all, but sat in his saddle hearkening the tales and
songs and jests of his fellows, who went close beside him, for more
often they went a-foot than rode. And, forsooth, as the sweet morning
wore, it seemed to him, so great was his joy, as if all the fair show
of the greenery, and the boles of the ancient oaks, and the squirrels
running from bough to bough, and the rabbits scuttling from under the
bracken, and the hind leaping in the wood-lawn, and the sun falling
through the rustling leaves, and the wind on his face, and the scent of
the forest, yea, and his fair companions and their loveliness & valiancy
and kindness, and the words and songs that came from their dear mouths,
all these seemed to him, as it were, one great show done for the behoof
and pleasure of him, the man come from the peril of death and the
sick-bed.

They lay that night in all glee under the green boughs; and arose on the
morrow, and went all day, and again slept in the greenwood, and the
next morning came down into a fair valley, which was indeed Littledale,
through which ran a pleasant little river; and on a grassy knoll, but
a short way from its bank, was a long framed hall, somewhat narrow,
and nought high, whitherward they turned them straightway, and were
presently before the door; then Gilbert drew a key from out of his scrip
and unlocked the door, and they entered, and found within a fair little
hall, with shut-beds out from it on the further side, and kitchen, and
store-bowers at the end; all things duly appointed with plenishing, and
meal and wine; for it was but some three months since one of Jack of the
Tofts' allies, Sir Launcelot a'Green and his wife and two bairns, had
left it till their affair was made straight; whereas he had dwelt there
a whole year, for he had been made an outlaw of Meadham, and was a dear
friend of the said Jack.

"Now," said David smiling, "here is now thy high house and thy castle,
little King Christopher; how doth it like thee?"

"Right well," said Christopher; "and, to say sooth, I would almost that
it were night, or my bones do else, that I might lie naked in a bed."

"Nay, lad," said Gilbert, "make it night now, and we will do all that
needs must be done, while thou liest lazy, as all kings use to do."

"Nay," said Christopher, "I will be more a king than so, for I will do
neither this nor that; I will not work and I will not go to bed, but
will look on, till it is time for me to take to the crooked stick and
the grey-goose wing and seek venison."

"That is better than well," said David; "for I can see by thine eyes,
that are dancing with pleasure, that in three or four days thou wilt be
about the thickets with us."

"Meantime," said Joanna, "thou shalt pay for thy meat and drink by
telling us tales when we come home weary."

"Yea," said Christopher laughing, "that ye may go to sleep before your
time."

So they talked, and were joyous and blithe together, and between them
they made the house trim, and decked it with boughs and blossoms; and
though Christopher told them no tale that night, Joanna and David sang
both; and in a night or two it was Christopher that was the minstrel. So
when the morrow came there began their life of the woodland; but, save
for the changing of the year and the chances of the hunt, the time
passed on from day to day with little change, and it was but seldom that
any man came their way. When Yule was, they locked the house door behind
them and went their ways home to the Tofts; and now of all of these
wayfarers was Christopher by far the hardest and strongest, for his side
had utterly forgotten Simon's knife. At the Tofts they were welcomed
with all triumph, and they were about there in the best of cheer, till
it was wearing toward Candlemas, and then they took occasion of a bright
and sunny day to go back to Littledale once more, and there they abode
till spring was come and was wearing into summer, and messages had come
and gone betwixt them and the Tofts, and it was agreed that with the
first of autumn they should go back to the Tofts and see what should
betide.

But now leave we Christopher and these good fellows of the Tofts and
turn to Goldilind, who is yet dwelling amid no very happy days in the
Castle of Greenharbour, on the northernmost marches of Meadham.




CHAPTER XII. OF GOLDILIND IN THE MAY MORNING AT GREENHARBOUR.


May was on the land now, and was come into its second week, and
Goldilind awoke on a morn in the Castle of Greenharbour; but little did
her eyes behold of the May, even when they were fully open; for she
was lying, not in her own chamber, which was proper, and even somewhat
stately, and from whence she could look on the sky and greenwood, but
in a chamber low down amidst the footings of the wall, little lighted,
unadorned, with nought in it for sport or pleasure; nought, forsooth,
save the pallet bed on which she lay, a joint stool and water ewer.
To be short, though it were called the Least Guard-chamber, it was a
prison, and she was there dreeing her penance, as Dame Elinor would
call the cruelty of her malice, which the chaplain, Dame Elinor's
led captain, had ordained her for some sin which the twain had forged
between them.

She lay there naked in her smock, with no raiment anigh her, and this
was the third morning whereon she had awakened to the dusky bare walls,
and a long while had their emptiness made of the hours: but she lay
quiet and musing, not altogether without cheer now; for indeed she was
not wont to any longer penance than this she had but now tholed, so she
looked for release presently: and, moreover, there had grown in her mind
during those three days a certain purpose; to wit, that she would get
hold of the governor of the castle privily, and two or three others of
the squires who most regarded her, and bewail her case to them, so that
she might perchance get some relief. Forsooth, as she called to mind
this resolve, her heart beat and her cheek flushed, for well she knew
that there was peril in it, and she forecast what might be the worst
that would come thereof, while, on the other hand, the best that might
be seemed to her like a glimpse of Paradise.

As she lay there and turned the matter over in her mind for this many an
hundred time, there came a key into the lock, and the door opened;
and thereby entered a tall woman, dark-haired, white-skinned, somewhat
young, and not ill-favoured: Goldilind still lay there, till the
new-comer said to her in a hard voice, wherein was both threatening and
mockery: "Rise up, our Lady! the Dame Elinor saith that it is enough,
and that thou art to go forth. Nay, hold a while; for I say unto thee
that it is yet early in the day, and that thy chamber is not yet dight
for thee, so thou must needs bestow thyself elsewhere till it be done."

Goldilind rose up, and said smiling: "Yea, Aloyse, but thou hast not
brought my raiment: and thou seest!"

The maid stood looking at her a moment somewhat evilly, and then said:
"Well, since it is but scant six o'clock, I may do that; but I bid thee
ask me not overmuch; for meseemeth Dame Elinor is not overwell pleased
with thee to-day, nor our chaplain either."

Therewith she turned and went out, locking the door behind her, and came
back presently bearing on her arm a green gown and other raiment: she
laid them on the stool before the Lady, and said: "Hasten, my Lady, and
let me go to my place: sooth to say, it may well be double trouble to
thee to don thy clothes, for thou mayst have to doff them again before
long."

Goldilind answered nought, but reddened and paled again as she clad her
under the waiting-maid's eyes. Then they went out together, and up a
short stone stair, till they were level with the greensward without.
Then the maid turned to Goldilind and said: "And now thou art clad and
out, my Lady, I wot not where thou art to go to, since to thy chamber
thou must not go. Nay, hold and hearken! here we be at the door which
opens on to the Foresters' Garth under the Foresters' Tower, thither
shalt thou abide till I come to fetch thee. How now, my Lady! what else
wouldst thou?"

Goldilind looked on her with a smile, yet with eagereyes, and said: "O
good Aloyse, wouldst thou but give me a piece of bread? for I hunger;
thou wottest my queenly board hath not been overloaded these last days."

"Ha!" said Aloyse; "if thou ask me overmuch I fear thou mayst pay for
it, my Lady; but this last asking thou shalt have, and then none other
till all thy penance thou hast dreed. Abide!"

Therewith she went up the stairs, and Goldilind, who now was but weak
with her prison and the sudden light, and the hope and fear of her
purpose of bewailing her story, sat her down on the stair there, almost,
as it were, 'twixt home and hell, till her heart came back to her and
the tears began to flow from her eyes. Forthright came back Aloyse,
bearing a white loaf and a little pitcher of milk on a silver
serving-dish; she laid them down, unlocked the door into the garden, and
thrust Goldilind through by the shoulders; then she turned and took up
her serving-dish with the bread and milk, and handed it to Goldilind
through the door, and said: "Now is my Lady served. It were indeed well
that my Lady should strengthen herself this hour for the hour next to
come."

Therewith she turned about, and shut and locked the door; and the King's
daughter fell to eagerly on her bread, and thought of little till
she had eaten and drunk, save that she felt the sweet scent of the
gilliflowers and eglantine as it were a part of her meal.

Then she went slowly down the garden, treading the greensward beside the
flowers; and she looked on the hold, and the low sun gilded the walls
thereof and glittered in a window here and there, and though there was
on her a foreboding of the hours of that day, she did what she might
to make the best of the fragrant May morning and the song of birds and
rustle of leaves, though, indeed, at whiles the tears would gush out of
her eyes when she thought how young she was and how feeble, and the pity
of herself became sweet unto her.




CHAPTER XIII. OF GOLDILIND IN THE GARTH.


Now, as she went in that garden with her face turned toward the postern
which led into the open space of the greenwood, which was but two
bow-shots from the thicket, she heard the clatter of horse-hoofs on the
loose stones of the path, and how they stopped at the said postern; and
presently there was a key in the lock, the door opened, and a man came
in walking stiffly, like a rider who has ridden far and fast. He was
clad in jack and sallet, and had a sword by his side, and on his sleeve
was done in green and gold a mountain aflame; so that Goldilind knew him
at once for a man of Earl Geoffrey's; and, indeed, she had seen the
man before, coming and going on errands that she knew nought of, and
on which nothing followed that was of import to her. Therefore, as
she watched him cross the garden and go straight up to the door of the
Foresters' Tower, and take out another key and enter, she heeded him but
little, nor did his coming increase her trouble a whit.

She walked on toward the postern, and now she saw that the errand-bearer
had left it open behind him, and when she came close up to it, she saw
his horse tied to a ring in the wall, a strong and good bay nag. The
sight of him, and the glimpse of the free and open land, stirred in her
the misery of her days and the yearning for the loveliness of the world
without, converse of friends, hope of the sufficiency of desire, and the
sweetness of love returned. And so strong a wave of anguish swept over
her, that she bowed her down upon the grass and wept bitterly. Yet but
a little while it lasted; she rose up presently and looked warily all
round her, and up to the Castle, and saw none stirring; she drew up the
skirts of her green gown into her girdle, till the hem but just hid her
knees; then she stepped lightly through the half-open door with flushed
cheeks and glittering eyes, while her heart rose within her; then she
lifted her hand, unhitched the reins from the iron ring, and quietly
led the horse close under the garth-wall, and stole gently up the
slope which, as all roads from the Castle, went straightway toward the
thicket, but this was the straightest. So she went, till she came to the
corner of the garth-wall, and a little further; and the Castle on that
side was blind, save for the swale on the battlement, whereon in that
deep peace was little going; and, moreover, it was not even yet six
o'clock.




CHAPTER XIV. GOLDILIND GOES FREE.


There then she stayed the horse, and, flushed and panting, got lightly
into the saddle and bestrode it, and, leaning over on the beast's neck,
smote his flanks with her heels; the horse was fresh, though his
master had been weary, whereas the said messenger had gotten him from
a forester some six miles away in the wood that morning, so the nag
answered to her call for speed, and she went a great gallop into the
wood, and was hidden in a twinkling from any eyes that might be looking
out of the Castle.

Without checking the nag she sped along, half mad with joy at the
freedom of this happy morn. Nigh aimless she was, but had an inkling
that it were well with her if she could hold northward ever; for the old
man aforesaid had told her of Oakenrealm, and how it lay northward of
them; so that way she drifted as the thicket would suffer her. When she
had gone as much of a gallop as she might for some half hour, she drew
rein to breathe her nag, and hearkened; she turned in the saddle, but
heard nought to affright her, so she went on again, but some what more
soberly; and thuswise she rode for some two hours, and the day waxed
hot, and she was come to a clear pool amidst of a little clearing,
covered with fine greensward right down to the water's edge.

There she made stay, and got off her horse, and stood awhile by him
as he cropped the sweet grass; and the birds sang at the edge of the
thicket, and the rabbits crept and gambolled on the other side of the
water; and from the pool's edge the moorhens cried. She stood half
leaning against the side of the horse till she became somewhat drowsy;
yea, and even dreamed a little, and that little but ill, it seemed, as
she gave a troubled cry and shrank together and turned pale. Then she
rubbed her eyes and smiled, and turned to the pool, where now a little
ripple was running over the face of it, and a thought came upon her,
and she set her hand to the clasp of her gown and undid it, and drew the
gown off her shoulders, and so did off all her raiment, and stood
naked a little on the warm sunny grass, and then bestirred her and went
lightly into the pool, and bathed and sported there, and then came on to
the grass again, and went to and fro to dry her in the air and sun. Then
she did on her raiment again, and laid her down under a thorn-bush
by the pool-side, and there, would she, would she not, went to sleep
soundly and dreamed not. And when she awoke she deemed her sleep had
been long, but it was not so, but scarce a score of minutes. Anyhow, she
sprang up now and went to her horse, and drew the girths tight (which
she had loosed erewhile,) and so bestrode the good horse, and shook the
reins, and rode away much comforted and enheartened.




CHAPTER XV. OF GOLDILIND IN THE WILD-WOOD.


Goldilind rode on, hastening yet to put as many miles as she might
betwixt her and Greenharbour. Within a three hours from her bathing she
fell a-hungering sore, and knew not what to do to eat, till she found a
pouch made fast to the saddle-bow, and therein a little white loaf, that
and no more, which she took and ate the half of with great joy, sitting
down by a brook-side, whence she had her drink.

Then again she mounted, and rode on till dusk overtook her just as she
came to a little river running from the north from pool to shallow, and
shallow to pool. And whereas she was now exceeding weary, and the good
horse also much spent, and that the grass was very sweet and soft down
to the water's edge, and that there was a thick thorn-bush to cover her,
she made up her mind that this place should be her bed-chamber. So she
took saddle and bridle off the horse, as he must needs bite the grass,
and then when she had eaten the other half of her bread, she laid her
down on the green grass, with her head on the saddle, and when she had
lain listening to the horse cropping the grass close anigh her for
a minute or two, she fell fast asleep, and lay there long and had no
dreams.




CHAPTER XVI. WHAT GOLDILIND FOUND IN THE WOOD.


When she awoke it was broad day and bright sun, and she rose up to her
feet and looked about, and saw the horse standing close by, and sharing
the shade with her, whisking his tail about lazily. Then she turned,
and saw the stream rippling out from the pool over the clean gravel, and
here and there a fish darting through the ripple, or making clean rings
on the pool as he quietly took a fly; the sky was blue and clear, there
was scarce a breath of air, and the morning was already hot; no worse
than yesterday sang the birds in the bushes; but as she looked across
the river, where, forsooth, the alders grew thick about the pool's edge,
a cock blackbird, and then another, flew out from the close boughs,
where they had been singing to their mates, with the sharp cry that they
use when they are frighted. Withal she saw the bush move, though, as
aforesaid, the morning was without wind. She had just stooped to do off
her foot-gear (for she was minded to bathe again), but now she stopped
with one shoe in her hand, and looked on the bushes keenly with beating
heart, and again she thought she saw the boughs shaken, and stood, not
daring to move a while; but they moved no more now when she had looked
steadily at them a space, and again a blackbird began singing loud just
where they had been shaken. So she gathered heart again, and presently
turned her hand once more to stripping her raiment off her, for she
would not be baulked of her bath; but when the stripping was done,
she loitered not naked on the bank as she had done the day before, but
walked swiftly into the shallow, and thence down into the pool, till
nothing but her head and the whiteness of her shoulders showed over the
dark water. Even then she turned her head about twice to look into the
over-side bushes, but when she saw nothing stir there she began to play
in the water, but not for long, but came splashing through the shallow
and hurried on her raiment.

When she was clad again she went up to the horse, and patted and
caressed him, and did bridle and saddle on him, and was going to climb
upon him, when, of a sudden, she thought she would lead him across, lest
there should be a hole near the other bank and he might stumble into
it unwarily; so she bared her feet once more and trussed up her gown
skirts, and so took the ford, leading the beast; the water was nowhere
up to mid-leg of her, and she stepped ashore on to short and fine grass,
which spread like a meadow before her, with a big thorn or two scattered
about it, and a little grassy hill beset with tall elms toward the top,
coming down into the flat of the meadow and drawing round it nearly up
to the river on the north side.

But now she stood staring in wonder and some deal of fear; for there
were three milch kine feeding on the meadow, and, moreover, under a
thorn, scarce a hundred yards from where she stood, was a tall man
standing gazing on her. So stricken was she that she might neither cry
out nor turn aside; neither did she think to pull her gown out of her
girdle to cover the nakedness of her legs.

When they had thus stood a little while the man began to move toward
her very slowly, nor did she dare to flee any the more. But when he was
within half a dozen paces her face flushed red, and she did pull her
gown out of its trusses and let it flow down. But he spake to her in a
pleasant voice, and said: "May I speak to thee, maiden?"

Fear was yet in her soul, so that she might not speak for a little, and
then she said: "O, I beseech thee, bring me not back to Greenharbour!"
And she paled sorely as she spake the word.

But he said: "I wot not of Greenharbour, how to find the way thereto,
though we have heard of it. But comfort thyself, I pray thee, there is
nought to fear in me."

The sound of his voice was full pleasant to her, and when she hearkened
him, how kind and frank it was, then she knew how much of terror was
blent with her joy in her newly-won freedom and the delight of the kind
and happy words. Yet still she spoke not, and was both shamefast and
still not altogether unafraid. Yet, sooth to say, though his attire was
but simple, he was nought wild or fierce to look on. From time to time
she looked on him, and then dropped her eyes again. In those glances she
saw that he was grey-eyed, and smooth-cheeked, and round-chinned, and
his hair curly and golden; and she must needs think that she had never
seen any face half so fair. He was clad but in a green coat that came
not down to his knees, and brogues were tied to his feet, and no more
raiment he had; and for hat he had made him a garland of white may
blossom, and well it sat there: and again she looked on him, and thought
him no worse than the running angel that goes before the throne of God
in the picture of the choir of Meadhamstead; and she looked on him and
marvelled.

Now she hung her head before him and wished he would speak, and even so
did he, and said: "Maiden, when I first saw thee from amidst of the bush
by the river yonder, I deemed thou wert a wood-wight, or some one of the
she-Gods of the Gentiles come back hither. For this is a lonely place,
and some might deem that the Devil hath might here more than in other
places; and when I saw thee, that thou wouldst do off thy raiment to
bathe thee, though soothly I longed to lie hidden there, I feared thee,
lest thou shouldst be angry with me if I were to see thee unclad; so I
came away; yet I went not far, for I was above all things yearning to
see thee; and sooth it is, that hadst thou not crossed the water, I
should presently have crossed it myself to seek thee, wert thou Goddess,
or wood-wife, or whatever might have come of it. But now thou art come
to us, and I have heard thy voice beseeching me not to bring thee to
Greenharbour, I see that thou art a woman of the kindred of Adam. And
yet so it is, that even now I fear thee somewhat. Yet I will pray thee
not to be wroth if I ask thee whether I may do aught for thy need."

Now she began somewhat to smile, and she looked him full in the face,
and said: "Forsooth, my need is simple, for I am hungry."

He smote himself on the breast, and said: "See now, what a great fool I
am, not to have known it without telling, instead of making long-winded
talk about myself. Come quickly, dear maiden, and leave thine horse to
crop the grass."

So he hurried on to the thorn-bush aforesaid, and she went foot to foot
with him, but he touched her not; and straightway she sat her down on
the root of the thorn, and smiled frankly on him, and said:

"Nay, sir, and now thou hast made me go all this way I am out of breath
and weary, so I pray thee of the victual at once."

But he had been busy with his scrip which he had left cast down there,
and therewithal reached out to her a mighty hunch of bread and a piece
of white cheese, and said:

"Now shall I fetch thee milk." Wherewith he took up a bowl of aspen tree
that had lain by the scrip, and ran off to one of the kine and milked
the bowl full, and came back with it heedfully, and set it down beside
her and said: "This was the nighest thing to hand, but when thou hast
eaten and rested then shall we go to our house, if thou wilt be so kind
to me; for there have we better meat and wine to boot."

She looked up at him smiling, but her pleasure of the meat and the
kindness was so exceeding, that she might not refrain from tears also,
but she spake not.

As for him, he knelt beside her, looking on her wistfully; and at last
he said: "I shall tell thee, that I am glad that thou wert hungry and
that I have seen thee eating, else might I have deemed thee somewhat
other than a woman of mankind even yet."

She said: "Yea, and why wouldst thou not believe my word thereto?"

He said, reddening: "I almost fear to tell thee, lest thou think me
overbold and be angry with me."

"Nay," she said, "tell me, for I would know."

Said he: "The words are not easy in my rude mouth; but this is what
I mean: that though I be young I have seen fair women not a few, but
beside any of them thou art a wonder;....and loth I were if thou wert
not really of mankind, if it were but for the glory of the world."

She hung her head and answered nought a while, and he also seemed
ashamed: but presently she spake: "Thou hast been kind to us, wouldst
thou tell us thy name? and then, if it like thee, what thou art?"

"Lady," he said, "my name is easy to tell, I hight Christopher; and
whiles folk in merry mockery call me Christopher King; meseems because I
am of the least account of all carles. As for what else I am, a woodman
I am, an outlaw, and the friend of them: yet I tell thee I have never
by my will done any harm to any child of man; and those friends of mine,
who are outlaws also, are kind and loving with me, both man and woman,
though needs must they dwell aloof from kings' courts and barons'
halls."

She looked at him wondering, and as if she did not altogether understand
him; and she said: "Where dost thou dwell?"

He said: "To-day I dwell hard by; though where I shall dwell to-morrow,
who knows? And with me are dwelling three of my kind fellows; and the
dearest is a young man of mine own age, who is my fellow in all matters,
for us to live and die each for the other. Couldst thou have seen him,
thou wouldst love him I deem."

"What name hath he?" said Goldilind.

"He hight David," said Christopher.

But therewith he fell silent and knit his brow, as though he were
thinking of some knotty point: but in a while his face cleared, and he
said: "If I durst, I would ask thee thy name, and what thou art?"

"As to my name," said she, "I will not tell it thee as now. As to what I
am, I am a poor prisoner; and much have I been grieved and tormented,
so that my body hath been but a thing whereby I might suffer anguish.
Something else am I, but I may not tell thee what as yet."

He looked on her long, and then arose and went his way along the very
track of their footsteps, and he took the horse and brought him back to
the thorn, and stood by the lady and reddened, and said: "I must tell
thee what I have been doing these last minutes."

"Yea," said she, looking at him wonderingly, "hast thou not been
fetching my horse to me?"

"So it is," said he; "but something else also. Ask me, or I cannot tell
thee."

She laughed, and said: "What else, fair sir?"

Said he: "Ask me what, or I cannot tell thee."

"Well, what, then?" said she.

He answered, stammering and blushing: "I have been looking at thy foot
prints, whereby thou camest up from the water, to see what new and
fairer blossoms have come up in the meadow where thy feet were set e'en
now."

She answered him nothing, and he held his peace. But in a while she
said: "If thou wouldst have us come to thine house, thou shalt lead
us thither now." And therewith she took her foot-gear from out of her
girdle, as if she would do it on, and he turned his face away, but
sighed therewith. Then she reddened and put them back again, and rose
up lightly, and said: "I will go afoot; and wilt thou lead the horse for
me?"

So did he, and led her by all the softest and most flowery ways, turning
about the end of a spur of the little hill that came close to the water,
and going close to the lip of the river. And when they had thus turned
about the hill there was a somewhat wider vale before them, grassy
and fair, and on a knoll, not far from the water, a long frame-house
thatched with reed.

Then said Christopher: "Lady, this is now Littledale, and yonder the
house thereof."

She said quietly: "Lovely is the dale, and fair the house by seeming,
and I would that they may be happy that dwell therein!"

Said Christopher: "Wilt thou not speak that blessing within the house as
without?"

"Fain were I thereof," she said. And therewith they came into the garth,
wherein the apple trees were blossoming, and Goldilind spread abroad
her hands and lifted up her head for joy of the sight and the scent, and
they stayed awhile before they went on to the door, which was half open,
for they feared none in that place, and looked for none whom they might
not deal with if he came as a foe.

Christopher would have taken a hand of her to lead her in, but both
hands were in her gown to lift up the hem as she passed over the
threshold; so he durst not.

Fair and bright now was the hall within, with its long and low windows
goodly glazed, a green halling on the walls of Adam and Eve and the
garden, and the good God walking therein; the sun shone bright through
the southern windows, and about the porch it was hot, but further toward
the dais cool and pleasant.

So Goldilind sat down in the coolest of the place at the standing table;
but Christopher bestirred himself, and brought wine and white bread, and
venison and honey, and said: "I pray thee to dine, maiden, for it is
now hard on noon; and as for my fair fellows, I look not for them before
sunset for they were going far into the wood."

She smiled on him, and ate and drank a little deal, and he with her.
Sooth to say, her heart was full, and though she had forgotten her fear,
she was troubled, because, for as glad as she was, she could not be as
glad as her gladness would have her, for the sake of some lack, she knew
not what.

Now spake Christopher: "I would tell thee something strange, to wit,
though it is little more than three hours since I first saw thee beside
the river, yet I seem to know thee as if thou wert a part of my life."

She looked on him shyly, and he went on: "This also is strange, and,
withal, it likes me not, that when I speak of my fair fellows here,
David, and Gilbert, and Joanna, they are half forgotten to my heart,
though their names are on my tongue; and this house, doth it like thee,
fair guest?"

"Yea, much," she said; "it seems joyous to me: and I shall tell thee
that I have mostly dwelt in unmerry houses, though they were of greater
cost than this."

Said Christopher: "To me it hath been merry and happy enough; but now it
seems to me as if it had all been made for thee and this meeting."

"Is it therefore no longer merry to thee because of that?" she said,
smiling, yet flushing much red therewith. Now it was his turn not to
answer her, and she cast down her eyes before him, and there was silence
between them.

Then she looked at him steadily, and said: "It is indeed grievous that
thou shouldest forget thine old friends for me, and that it should have
come into thy mind that this fair and merry house was not made for thy
fair fellows and thy delight with them, but for me, the chance-comer.
For, hearken, whereas thou saidst e'en now, that I was become a part of
thy life, how can that be? For if I become the poor captive again, how
canst thou get to me, thou who art thyself a castaway, as thou hast told
me? Yea, but even so, I shall be too low for thee to come down to me.
And if I become what I should be, then I must tell thee that I shall
be too high for thee to climb up to me; so that in one way or other we
shall be sundered, who have but met for an hour or two."

He hung his head a while as they stood there face to face, for both of
them had arisen from the board; but presently he looked up to her with
glittering eyes, and said: "Yea, for an hour or two; why then do we
tarry and linger, and say what we have no will to say, and refrain from
what our hearts bid us?"

Therewith he caught hold of her right wrist, and laid his hand on her
left shoulder, and this first time that he had touched her, it was as if
a fire ran through all his body and changed it into the essence of her:
neither was there any naysay in her eyes, nor any defence against him in
the yielding body of her. But even in that nick of time he drew back a
little, and turned his head, as a man listening, toward the door, and
said: "Hist! hist! Dost thou hear, maiden?" She turned deadly pale: "O
what is it? What is it? Yea, I hear; it is horses drawing nigh, and the
sound of hounds baying. But may it not be thy fellows coming back?"

"Nay, nay," he said; "they rode not in armour. Hark to it! and these
hounds are deep-voiced sleuth-dogs! But come now, there may yet be
time."

He turned, and caught up axe and shield from off the wall, and drew her
toward a window that looked to the north, and peered out of it warily;
but turned back straightway, and said: "Nay, it is too late that way,
they are all round about the house. Maiden, get thou up into the solar
by this stair, and thou wilt find hiding-place behind the traverse of
the bed; and if they go away, and my fellows come in due time, then art
thou safe. But if not, surely they shall do thee no hurt; for I think,
indeed, that thou art some great one."

And he fell to striding down the hall toward the door; but she ran after
him, and caught his arm, and said: "Nay, nay, I will not hide, to be
dragged out of my refuge like a thief: thou sayest well that I am of the
great; I will stand by thee and command and forbid as a Queen. O go not
to the door! Stay by me, stay!"

"Nay, nay," he said, "there is nought for it but the deed of arms. Look!
seest thou not steel by the porch?"

And therewith he broke from her and ran to the door, and was met upon
the very threshold by all-armed men, upon whom he fell without more ado,
crying out: "For the Tofts! For the Tofts! The woodman to the rescue!"
And he hewed right and left on whatsoever was before him, so that what
fell not, gave back, and for a moment of time he cleared the porch; but
in that nick of time his axe brake on the basnet of a huge man-at-arms,
and they all thrust them on him together and drave him back into the
hall, and came bundling after him in a heap. But he drave his shield
at one, and then with his right hand smote another on the bare face, so
that he rolled over and stirred no more till the day of doom. Then was
there a weapon before him, might he have stooped to pick it up; but he
might not; so he caught hold of a sturdy but somewhat short man by the
collar and the lap of his leather surcoat, and drew aback, and with a
mighty heave cast him on the rout of them, who for their parts had drawn
back a little also, as if he had been a huge stone, and down went two
before that artillery; and they set up a great roar of wonder and fear.
But he followed them, and this time got an axe in his hand, so mazed
they were by his onset, and he hewed at them again and drave them aback
to the threshold of the door: but could get them no further, and they
began to handle long spears to thrust at him.

But then came forward a knight, no mickle man, but clad in very goodly
armour, with a lion beaten in gold on his green surcoat; this man smote
up the spears, and made the men go back a little, while he stood on the
threshold; so Christopher saw that he would parley with him, and forbore
him, and the knight spake: "Thou youngling, art thou mad? What doest
thou falling on my folk?"

"And what do ye," said Christopher fiercely, "besetting the houses of
folk with weapons? Now wilt thou take my life. But I shall yet slay one
or two before I die. Get thee back, lord, or thou shalt be the first."

But the knight, who had no weapon in his hand, said: "We come but
to seek our own, and that is our Lady of Meadham, who dwelleth at
Greenharbour by her own will. And if thou wilt stand aside thou mayst go
free to the devil for us."

Now would Christopher have shouted and fallen on, and gone to his death
there and then; but even therewith a voice, clear and sweet, spake at
the back of him, and said: "Thou kind host, do thou stand aside and let
us speak that which is needful." And therewith stepped forth Goldilind
and stood beside Christopher, and said: "Sir Burgreve, we rode forth to
drink the air yesterday, and went astray amidst the wild-wood, and were
belated, so that we must needs lie down under the bare heaven; but this
morning we happened on this kind forester, who gave us to eat, and took
us to his house and gave us meat and drink; for which it were seemlier
to reward him than threaten him. Now it is our pleasure that ye lead us
back to Greenharbour; but as for this youth, that ye do him no hurt, but
let him go free, according to thy word spoken e'en now, Sir Burgreve."

She spake slowly and heavily, as one who hath a lesson to say, and it
was to be seen of her that all grief was in her heart, though her words
were queenly. Some of them that heard laughed; but the Burgreve spake,
and said: "Lady, we will do thy will in part, for we will lead thee to
Greenharbour in all honour; but as to this young man, if he will not be
slain here and now, needs must he with us. For he hath slain two of our
men outright, and hath hurt many, and, methinks, the devil of the woods
is in his body. So do thou bid him be quiet, if thou wouldst not see his
blood flow."

She turned a pale unhappy face on Christopher, and said: "My friend,
we bid thee withstand them no more, but let them do with thee as they
will."

Christopher stood aside therewith, and sat down on a bench and laughed,
and said in a high voice: "Stout men-at-arms, forsooth, to take a maid's
kirtle to their shield."

But therewith the armed men poured into the hall, and a half dozen of
the stoutest came up unto Christopher where he sat, and bound his hands
with their girdles, and he withstood them no whit, but sat laughing in
their faces, and made as if it were all a Yule-tide game. But inwardly
his heart burned with anger, and with love of that sweet Lady.

Then they made him stand up, and led him without the house, and set him
on a horse, and linked his feet together under the belly thereof. And
when that was done he saw them lead out the Lady, and they set her in a
horse litter, and then the whole troop rode off together, with two
men riding on either side of the said litter. In this wise they left
Littledale.




CHAPTER XVII. GOLDILIND COMES BACK TO GREENHARBOUR.


They rode speedily, and had with them men who knew the woodland ways,
so that the journey was nought so long thence as Goldilind had made it
thither; and they stayed not for nightfall, since the moon was bright,
so that they came before the Castle-gate before midnight. Now Goldilind
looked to be cast into prison, whatever might befall her upon the
morrow; but so it went not, for she was led straight to her own chamber,
and one of her women, but not Aloyse, waited on her, and when she tried
to have some tidings of her, the woman spake to her no more than if she
were dumb. So all unhappily she laid her down in her bed, foreboding the
worst, which she deemed might well be death at the hand of her jailers.
As for Christopher, she saw the last of him as they entered the
Castle-gate, and knew not what they had done with him. So she lay in
dismal thoughts, but at last fell asleep for mere weariness.

When she awoke it was broad day, and there was someone going about in
the chamber; she turned, and saw that it was Aloyse. She felt sick
at heart, and durst not move or ask of tidings; but presently Aloyse
turned, and came to the bed, and made an obeisance, but spake not.
Goldilind raised her head, and said wearily: "What is to be done,
Aloyse, wilt thou tell me? For my heart fails me, and meseems, unless
they have some mercy, I shall die to-day."

"Nay," said the chambermaid, "keep thine heart up; for here is one at
hand who would see thee, when it is thy pleasure to be seen."

"Yea," said Goldilind, "Dame Elinor to wit." And she moaned, and fear
and heart-sickness lay so heavy on her that she went nigh to swooning

But Aloyse lifted up her head, and brought her wine and made her drink,
and when Goldilind was come to herself again the maid said: "I say, keep
up thine heart, for it is not Dame Elinor and the rods that would see
thee, but a mighty man; nay, the most mighty, to wit, Earl Geoffrey, who
is King of Meadham in all but the name."

Goldilind did in sooth take heart at this tidings, and she said: "I
wonder what he may have to do here; all this while he hath not been to
Greenharbour, or, mayhappen, it might have been better for me."

"I wot not," said Aloyse, "but even so it is. I shall tell thee, the
messenger, whose horse thou didst steal, brought no other word in his
mouth save this, that my Lord Earl was coming; and come he did; but
that was toward sunset, long after they had laid the blood-hounds on thy
slot, and I had been whipped for letting thee find the way out a-gates.
Now, our Lady, when thou hast seen the Earl, and hast become our Lady
and Mistress indeed, wilt thou bethink thee of the morn before yesterday
on my behalf?"

"Yea," said Goldilind, "if ever it shall befall."

"Befall it shall," said Aloyse; "I dreamed of thee three nights ago, and
thou sitting on thy throne commanding and forbidding the great men. But
at worst no harm hath happened save to my shoulders and sides, by thy
stealing thyself, since thou hast come back in the nick of time, and of
thine own will, as men say. But tell me now of thine holiday, and if it
were pleasant to thee?"

Goldilind fell a-weeping at the word, bethinking her of yesterday
morning, and Aloyse stood looking on her, but saying nought. At last
spake Goldilind softly: "Tell me, Aloyse, didst thou hear any speaking
of that young man who was brought in hither last night? Have they slain
him?"

Said Aloyse: "Soothly, my Lady, I deem they have done him no hurt,
though I wot not for sure. There hath been none headed or hanged in the
base-court to-day. I heard talk amongst the men-at-arms of one whom they
took; they said he was a wonder of sheer strength, and how that