The Project Gutenberg eBook of The History and Practice of the Art of Photography
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The History and Practice of the Art of Photography

Author: Henry Hunt Snelling


        
Release date: October 1, 1994 [eBook #168]
                Most recently updated: January 1, 2021

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/168

Credits: Produced by Gregory Walker, for the Digital Daguerreian Archive Project.


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HISTORY AND PRACTICE OF THE ART OF PHOTOGRAPHY ***




Produced by Gregory Walker, for the Digital Daguerreian Archive Project.










This etext was created by Gregory Walker, in Austin, Texas, for the
Digital Daguerreian Archive Project--electronic texts from the dawn of
photography.

Internet: gwalker@netcom.com   CompuServe: 73577,677

The location of the illustrations in the text are marked by
"[hipho_##.gif]" on a separate line.

I hope this etext inspires a wider interest in the origins of
photography and in the modern practice of the Daguerreian Art.





THE HISTORY AND PRACTICE OF THE ART OF PHOTOGRAPHY;

OR THE PRODUCTION OF PICTURES THROUGH THE AGENCY OF LIGHT.

CONTAINING ALL THE INSTRUCTIONS NECESSARY FOR THE COMPLETE PRACTICE OF
THE DAGUERREAN AND PHOTOGENIC ART, BOTH ON METALLIC PLATES AND ON PAPER.


By HENRY H. SNELLING.



ILLUSTRATED WITH WOOD CUTS.



New York:  PUBLISHED BY G. P. PUTNAM, 155 Broadway, 1849.




Entered according to act of Congress in the year 1849, by H. H.
Snelling, in the Clerk's office, of the District Court of the Southern
District of New York.


New York:  PRINTED BY BUSTEED & McCOY, 163 Fulton Street.




TO EDWARD ANTHONY, ESQ., AN ESTEEMED FRIEND.

Whose gentlemanly deportment, liberal feelings, and strict integrity
have secured him a large circle of friends, this work is Respectfully
Dedicated By the AUTHOR.




                            PREFACE.


The object of this little work is to fill a void much complained of by
Daguerreotypists--particularly young beginners.

The author has waited a long time in hopes that some more able pen
would be devoted to the subject, but the wants of the numerous, and
constantly increasing, class, just mentioned, induces him to wait no
longer.

All the English works on the subject--particularly on the practical
application, of Photogenic drawing--are deficient in many minute
details, which are essential to a complete understanding of the art.
Many of their methods of operating are entirely different from, and
much inferior to, those practised in the United States: their
apparatus, also, cannot compare with ours for completeness, utility or
simplicity.

I shall, therefore, confine myself principally--so far as Photogenic
drawing upon metalic plates is concerned--to the methods practised by
the most celebrated and experienced operators, drawing upon French and
English authority only in cases where I find it essential to the
purpose for which I design my work, namely:  furnishing a complete
system of Photography; such an one as will enable any gentleman, or
lady, who may wish to practise the art, for profit or amusement, to do
so without the trouble and expense of seeking instruction from
professors, which in many cases within my own knowledge has prevented
persons from embracing the profession.

To English authors I am principally indebted for that portion of my
work relating to Photogenic drawing on paper.  To them we owe nearly
all the most important improvements in that branch of the art.
Besides, it has been but seldom attempted in the United States, and
then without any decided success.  Of these attempts I shall speak
further in the Historical portion of this volume.

Every thing essential, therefore, to a complete knowledge of the whole
art, comprising all the most recent discoveries and improvements down
to the day of publication will be found herein laid down.




CONTENTS

      I.  A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE ART.
     II.  THE THEORY ON LIGHT.--THE PHOTOGRAPHIC PRINCIPLE
    III.  SYNOPSIS OF MR. HUNT'S TREATISE ON "THE INFLUENCE OF THE
          SOLAR RAYS ON COMPOUND BODIES, WITH ESPECIAL REFERENCE TO
          THEIR PHOTOGRAPHIC APPLICATION."
     IV.  A FEW HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS TO DAGUERREOTYPISTS.
      V.  DAGUERREOTYPE APPARATUS.
     VI.  THE DAGUERREOTYPE PROCESS.
    VII.  PAPER DAGUERREOTYPES.--ETCHING DAGUERREOTYPES.
   VIII.  PHOTOGENIC DRAWING ON PAPER.
     IX.  CALOTYPE AND CHRYSOTYPE.
      X.  CYANOTYPE--ENERGIATYPE--CHROMATYPE--ANTHOTYPE--AMPHITYPE
          AND "CRAYON DAGUERREOTYPE."
     XI.  ON THE PROBABILITY OF PRODUCING COLORED PICTURES BY THE SOLAR
          RADIATIONS--PHOTOGRAPHIC DEVIATIONS--LUNAR PICTURES--DRUMMOND
          LIGHT.
    XII.  ON COLORING DAGUERREOTYPES.
   XIII.  THE PHOTOGRAPHOMETER.
          INDEX.




INTRODUCTION


  New York, January 27, 1849.
  E. ANTHONY, ESQ.

Dear Sir,--In submitting the accompanying "History and Practice of
Photography" to your perusal, and for your approbation, I do so with
the utmost confidence in your ability as a practical man, long engaged
in the science of which it treats, as well as your knowledge of the
sciences generally; as well as your regard for candor.  To you,
therefore, I leave the decision whether or no I have accomplished my
purpose, and produced a work which may not only be of practical benefit
to the Daguerrean artist, but of general interest to the reading
public, and your decision will influence me in offering it for, or
withholding it from, publication.

If it meets your approbation, I would most respectfully ask permission
to dedicate it to you, subscribing myself,

  With esteem,
  Ever truly yours,
  HENRY H. SNELLING


  New York, February 1st, 1849.
  Mr. H. H. SNELLING.

Dear Sir--Your note of January 27th, requesting permission to dedicate
to me your "History and Practice of Photography," I esteem a high
compliment, particularly since I have read the manuscript of your work.

Such a treatise has long been needed, and the manner in which you have
handled the subject will make the book as interesting to the reading
public as it is valuable to the Daguerrean artist, or the amateur
dabbler in Photography.  I have read nearly all of the many works upon
this art that have emanated from the London and Paris presses, and I
think the reader will find in yours the pith of them all, with much
practical and useful information that I do not remember to have seen
communicated elsewhere.

There is much in it to arouse the reflective and inventive faculties of
our Daguerreotypists.  They have heretofore stumbled along with very
little knowledge of the true theory of their art, and yet the quality
of their productions is far in advance of those of the French and
English artists, most of whose establishments I have had the pleasure
of visiting I feel therefore, that when a sufficient amount of
theoretic knowledge shall have been added to this practical skill on
the part of our operators, and when they shall have been made fully
acquainted with what has been attained or attempted by others, a still
greater advance in the art will be manifested.

A GOOD Daguerreotypist is by no means a mere machine following a
certain set of fixed rules.  Success in this art requires personal
skill and artistic taste to a much greater degree than the unthinking
public generally imagine; in fact more than is imagined by nine-tenths
of the Daguerreotypists themselves.  And we see as a natural result,
that while the business numbers its thousands of votaries, but few rise
to any degree of eminence.  It is because they look upon their business
as a mere mechanical operation, and having no aim or pride beyond the
earning of their daily bread, they calculate what will be a fair per
centage on the cost of their plate, case, and chemicals, leaving MIND,
which is as much CAPITAL as anything else (where it is exercised,)
entirely out of the question.

The art of taking photographs on PAPER, of which your work treats at
considerable length, has as yet attracted but little attention in this
country, though destined, as I fully believe, to attain an importance
far superior to that to which the Daguerreotype has risen.

The American mind needs a waking up upon the subject, and I think your
book will give a powerful impulse in this direction.  In Germany a high
degree of perfection has been reached, and I hope your countrymen will
not be slow to follow.

Your interesting account of the experiments of Mr. Wattles was entirely
new to me, and is another among the many evidences that when the age is
fully ripe for any great discovery, it is rare that it does not occur
to more than a single mind.

Trusting that your work will meet with the encouragement which your
trouble in preparing it deserves, and with gratitude for the undeserved
compliment paid to me in its dedication,

  I remain, very sincerely,
  Your friend and well wisher,
  E. ANTHONY.



PHOTOGRAPHY.

CHAP. I.

A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE ART.


As in all cases of great and valuable inventions in science and art the
English lay claim to the honor of having first discovered that of
Photogenic drawing.  But we shall see in the progress of this history,
that like many other assumptions of their authors, priority in this is
no more due them, then the invention of steamboats, or the cotton gin.

This claim is founded upon the fact that in 1802 Mr. Wedgwood recorded
an experiment in the Journal of the Royal Institution of the following
nature.

"A piece of paper, or other convenient material, was placed upon a
frame and sponged over with a solution of nitrate of silver; it was
then placed behind a painting on glass and the light traversing the
painting produced a kind of copy upon the prepared paper, those parts
in which the rays were least intercepted being of the darkest hues.
Here, however, terminated the experiment; for although both Mr.
Wedgwood and Sir Humphry Davey experimented carefully, for the purpose
of endeavoring to fix the drawings thus obtained, yet the object could
not be accomplished, and the whole ended in failure."

This, by their own showing, was the earliest attempt of the English
savans.  But this much of the principle was known to the Alchemists at
an early date--although practically produced in another way--as the
following experiment, to be found in old books, amply proves.

"Dissolve chalk in aquafortis to the consistence of milk, and add to it
a strong solution of silver; keep this liquor in a glass bottle well
stopped; then cutting out from a piece of paper the letters you would
have appear, paste it on the decanter, and lay it in the sun's rays in
such a manner that the rays may pass through the spaces cut out of the
paper and fall on the surface of the liquor the part of the glass
through which the rays pass will be turned black, while that under the
paper remains white; but particular care must be observed that the
bottle be not moved during the operation."

Had not the alchemists been so intent upon the desire to discover the
far famed philosopher's stone, as to make them unmindful of the
accidental dawnings of more valuable discoveries, this little
experiment in chemistry might have induced them to prosecute a more
thorough search into the principle, and Photogenic art would not now,
as it is, be a new one.

It is even asserted that the Jugglers of India were for many ages in
possession of a secret by which they were enabled, in a brief space, to
copy the likeness of any individual by the action of light.  This fact,
if fact it be, may account for the celebrated magic mirrors said to be
possessed by these jugglers, and probable cause of their power over the
people.

However, as early as 1556 the fact was established that a combination
of chloride and silver, called, from its appearance, horn silver, was
blackened by the sun's rays; and in the latter part of the last century
Mrs. Fulhame published an experiment by which a change of color was
effected in the chloride of gold by the agency of light; and gave it as
her opinion that words might be written in this way.  These incidents
are considered as the first steps towards the discovery of the
Photogenic art.

Mr. Wedgwood's experiments can scarcely be said to be any improvement
on them since he failed to bring them to practical usefulness, and his
countrymen will have to be satisfied with awarding the honor of its
complete adaptation to practical purposes, to MM.  Niepce and Daguerre
of France, and to Professors Draper, and Morse of New-York.

These gentlemen--MM.  Niepce and Daguerre--pursued the subject
simultaneously, without either, however being aware of the experiments
of his colleague in science.  For several years, each pursued his
researches individually until chance made them acquainted, when they
entered into co-partnership, and conjointly brought the art almost to
perfection.

M. Niepce presented his first paper on the subject to the Royal Society
in 1827, naming his discovery Heliography.  What led him to the study
of the principles of the art I have no means, at present, of knowing,
but it was probably owing to the facts recorded by the Alchemists, Mrs.
Fulhame and others, already mentioned.  But M. Daguerre, who is a
celebrated dioramic painter, being desirous of employing some of the
singularly changeable salts of silver to produce a peculiar class of
effects in his paintings, was led to pursue an investigation which
resulted in the discovery of the Daguerreotype, or Photogenic drawing
on plates of copper coated with silver.

To this gentleman--to his liberality--are we Americans indebted for the
free use of his invention; and the large and increasing class of
Daguerrean artists of this country should hold him in the most profound
respect for it.  He was not willing that it should be confined to a few
individuals who might monopolise the benefits to be derived from its
practice, and shut out all chance of improvement.  Like a true, noble
hearted French gentleman he desired that his invention should spread
freely throughout the whole world.  With these views he opened
negociations with the French government which were concluded most
favorably to both the inventors, and France has the "glory of endowing
the whole world of science and art with one of the most surprising
discoveries that honor the land."

Notwithstanding this, it has been patented in England and the result is
what might have been expected:  English pictures are far below the
standard of excellence of those taken by American artists.  I have seen
some medium portraits, for which a guinea each had been paid, and taken
too, by a celebrated artist, that our poorest Daguerreotypists would be
ashamed to show to a second person, much less suffer to leave their
rooms.

CALOTYPE, the name given to one of the methods of Photogenic drawing on
paper, discovered, and perfected by Mr. Fox Talbot of England, is
precisely in the same predicament, not only in that country but in the
United States, Mr. Talbot being patentee in both.  He is a man of some
wealth, I believe, but he demands so high a price for a single right in
this country, that none can be found who have the temerity to purchase.

The execution of his pictures is also inferior to those taken by the
German artists, and I would remark en passant, that the Messrs.  Mead
exhibited at the last fair of the American Institute, (of 1848,) four
Calotypes, which one of the firm brought from Germany last Spring, that
for beauty, depth of tone and excellence of execution surpass the
finest steel engraving.

When Mr. Talbot's patent for the United States expires and our
ingenious Yankee boys have the opportunity, I have not the slightest
doubt of the Calotype, in their hands, entirely superceding the
Daguerreotype.

Let them, therefore, study the principles of the art as laid down in
this little work, experiment, practice and perfect themselves in it,
and when that time does arrive be prepared to produce that degree of
excellence in Calotype they have already obtained in Daguerreotype.

It is to Professor Samuel F. B. Morse, the distinguished inventor of
the Magnetic Telegraph, of New York, that we are indebted for the
application of Photography, to portrait taking.  He was in Paris, for
the purpose of presenting to the scientific world his Electro-Magnetic
Telegraph, at the time, (1838,) M. Daguerre announced his splendid
discovery, and its astounding results having an important bearing on
the arts of design arrested his attention.  In his letter to me on the
subject, the Professor gives the following interesting facts.

"The process was a secret, and negociations were then in progress, for
the disclosure of it to the public between the French government and
the distinguished discoverer.  M. Daguerre had shown his results to the
king, and to a few only of the distinguished savans, and by the advice
of M. Arago, had determined to wait the action of the French Chambers,
before showing them to any other persons.  I was exceedingly desirous
of seeing them, but knew not how to approach M. Daguerre who was a
stranger to me.  On mentioning my desire to Robert Walsh, Esq., our
worthy Consul, he said to me; 'state that you are an American, the
inventor of the Telegraph, request to see them, and invite him in turn
to see the Telegraph, and I know enough of the urbanity and liberal
feelings of the French, to insure you an invitation.' I was successfull
in my application, and with a young friend, since deceased, the
promising son of Edward Delevan, Esq., I passed a most delightful hour
with M. Daguerre, and his enchanting sun-pictures. My letter containing
an account of this visit, and these pictures, was the first
announcement in this country of this splendid discovery."

"I may here add the singular sequel to this visit.  On the succeeding
day M. Daguerre paid me a visit to see the Telegraph and witness its
operations.  He seemed much gratified and remained with me perhaps two
hours; two melancholy hours to him, as they afterwards proved; or while
he was with me, his buildings, including his diorama, his studio, his
laboratory, with all the beautiful pictures I had seen the day before,
were consumed by fire.  Fortunately for mankind, matter only was
consumed, the soul and mind of the genius, and the process were still
in existence."

On his return home, Professor Morse waited with impatience for the
revelation of M. Daguerre's process, and no sooner was it published
than he procured a copy of the work containing it, and at once
commenced taking Daguerreotype pictures.  At first his object was
solely to furnish his studio with studies from nature; but his
experiments led him into a belief of the practicability of procuring
portraits by the process, and he was undoubtedly the first whose
attempts were attended with success.  Thinking, at that time, that it
was necessary to place the sitters in a very strong light, they were
all taken with their eyes closed.

Others were experimenting at the same time, among them Mr. Wolcott and
Prof. Draper, and Mr. Morse, with his accustomed modesty, thinks that
it would be difficult to say to whom is due the credit of the first
Daguerreotype portrait.  At all events, so far as my knowledge serves
me, Professor Morse deserves the laurel wreath, as from him originated
the first of our inumerable class of Daguerreotypists; and many of his
pupils have carried the manipulation to very great perfection.  In
connection with this matter I will give the concluding paragraph of a
private letter from the Professor to me; He says.

"If mine were the first, other experimenters soon made better results,
and if there are any who dispute that I was first, I shall have no
argument with them; for I was not so anxious to be the first to produce
the result, as to produce it in any way.  I esteem it but the natural
carrying out of the wonderful discovery, and that the credit was after
all due to Daguerre.  I lay no claim to any improvements."

Since I commenced the compilation of this work, I have had the pleasure
of making the acquaintance of an American gentleman--James M. Wattles
Esq.--who as early as 1828--and it will be seen, by what I have already
stated, that this is about the same date of M. Niepce's discovery--had
his attention attracted to the subject of Photography, or as he termed
it "Solar picture drawing," while taking landscape views by means of
the camera-obscura.  When we reflect upon all the circumstances
connected with his experiments, the great disadvantages under which he
labored, and his extreme youthfullness, we cannot but feel a national
pride--yet wonder--that a mere yankee boy, surrounded by the deepest
forests, hundred of miles from the populous portion of our country,
without the necessary materials, or resources for procuring them,
should by the force of his natural genius make a discovery, and put it
in practical use, to accomplish which, the most learned philosophers of
Europe, with every requisite apparatus, and a profound knowledge of
chemistry--spent years of toil to accomplish.  How much more latent
talent may now be slumbering from the very same cause which kept Mr.
Wattles from publicly revealing his discoveries, viz; want of
encouragement--ridicule!

At the time when the idea of taking pictures permanently on paper by
means of the camera-obscura first occurred to him, he was but sixteen
years of age, and under the instructions of Mr. Charles Le Seuer, (a
talented artist from Paris) at the New Harmony school, Indiana.
Drawing and painting being the natural bent of his mind, he was
frequently employed by the professors to make landscape sketches in the
manner mentioned.  The beauty of the image of these landscapes produced
on the paper in the camera-obscura, caused him to pause and admire them
with all the ardor of a young artist, and wish that by some means, he
could fix them there in all their beauty.  From wishing he brought
himself to think that it was not only possible but actually capable of
accomplishment and from thinking it could, he resolved it should be
done.

He was, however, wholly ignorant of even the first principles of
chemistry, and natural philosophy, and all the knowledge he was enabled
to obtain from his teachers was of very little service to him.  To add
to this, whenever he mentioned his hopes to his parents, they laughed
at him, and bade him attend to his studies and let such moonshine
thoughts alone--still he persevered, though secretly, and he met with
the success his perseverance deserved.

For the truth of his statement, Mr. Wattles refers to some of our most
respectable citizens residing at the west, and I am in hopes that I
shall be enabled to receive in time for this publication, a
confirmation from one or more of these gentlemen.  Be that as it may, I
feel confident in the integrity of Mr. Wattles, and can give his
statement to the world without a doubt of its truth.

The following sketch of his experiments and their results will,
undoubtedly, be interesting to every American reader and although some
of the profound philosophers of Europe may smile at his method of
proceeding, it will in some measure show the innate genius of American
minds, and prove that we are not far behind our trans-atlantic brethren
in the arts and sciences.

Mr. Wattles says:  "In my first efforts to effect the desired object,
they were feeble indeed, and owing to my limited knowledge of
chemistry--wholly acquired by questioning my teachers--I met with
repeated failures but following them up with a determined spirit, I at
last produced, what I thought very fair samples--but to proceed to my
experiments."

"I first dipped a quarter sheet of thin white writing paper in a weak
solution of caustic (as I then called it) and dried it in an empty box,
to keep it in the dark; when dry, I placed it in the camera and watched
it with great patience for nearly half an hour, without producing any
visible result; evidently from the solution being to weak.  I then
soaked the same piece of paper in a solution of common potash, and then
again in caustic water a little stronger than the first, and when dry
placed it in the camera.  In about forty-five minutes I plainly
percieved the effect, in the gradual darkening of various parts of the
view, which was the old stone fort in the rear of the school garden,
with the trees, fence, &c.  I then became convinced of the
practicability of producing beautiful solar pictures in this way; but,
alas! my picture vanished and with it, all--no not all--my hopes.  With
renewed determination I began again by studying the nature of the
preparation, and came to the conclusion, that if I could destroy the
part not acted upon by the light without injuring that which was so
acted upon, I could save my pictures.  I then made a strong solution of
sal. soda I had in the house, and soaked my paper in it, and then
washed it off in hot water, which perfectly fixed the view upon the
paper.  This paper was very poor with thick spots, more absorbent than
other parts, and consequently made dark shades in the picture where
they should not have been; but it was enough to convince me that I had
succeeded, and that at some future time, when I had the means and a
more extensive knowledge of chemistry, I could apply myself to it
again.  I have done so since, at various times, with perfect success;
but in every instance laboring under adverse circumstances."

I have very recently learned, that, under the present patent laws of
the United States, every foreign patentee is required to put his
invention, or discovery, into practical use within eighteen months
after taking out his papers, or otherwise forfeit his patent.  With
regard to Mr. Talbot's Calotype patent, this time has nearly, if not
quite expired, and my countrymen are now at perfect liberty to
appropriate the art if they feel disposed.  From the statement of Mr.
Wattles, it will be perceived that this can be done without dishonor,
as in the first instance Mr. Talbot had no positive right to his patent.

Photography; or sun-painting is divided, according to the methods
adopted for producing pictures, into

  DAGUERREOTYPE, CHROMATYPE,
  CALOTYPE,      ENERGIATYPE,
  CHRYSOTYPE,    ANTHOTYPE and
  CYANOTYPE,     AMPHITYPE.



CHAP. II.

THE THEORY ON LIGHT.--THE PHOTOGRAPHIC PRINCIPLE


Some philosophers contend that to the existence of light alone we owe
the beautiful effects produced by the Photogenic art, while others give
sufficient reasons for doubting the correctness of the assumption.
That the results are effected by a principle associated with light and
not by the luminous principle itself, is the most probable conclusion.
The importance of a knowledge of this fact becomes most essential in
practice, as will presently be seen.  To this principle Mr. Hunt gives
the name of ENERGIA.

THE NATURE of Light is not wholly known, but it is generally believed
to be matter, as in its motions it obeys the laws regulating matter.
So closely is it connected with heat and electricity that there can be
little doubt of their all being but different modifications of the same
substance.  I will not, however, enter into a statement of the various
theories of Philosophers on this head, but content myself with that of
Sir Isaac Newton; who supposed rays of light to consist of minute
particles of matter, which are constantly emanating from luminous
bodies and cause vision, as odoriferous particles, proceeding from
certain bodies, cause smelling.

The effects of light upon other bodies, and how light is effected by
them, involve some of the most important principles, which if properly
understood by Daguerreotypists would enable them to improve and correct
many of the practical operations in their art.  These effects we shall
exhibit in this and the following chapters.  Before we enter on this
subject it will be necessary to become familiar with the

DEFINITIONS of some of the terms used in the science of optics.

Luminous bodies are of two kinds; those which shine by their own light,
and those which shine by reflected light.

Transparent bodies are such as permit rays of light to pass through
them.

Translucent bodies permit light to pass faintly, but without
representing the figure of objects seen through them.

Opaque bodies permit no light to pass through them, but reflect light.

A ray is a line of light.

A beam is a collection of parallel rays.

A pencil is a collection of converging, or diverging rays.

A medium is any space through which light passes.

Incident rays are those which fall upon the surface of a body.

Reflected rays are those which are thrown off from a body.

Parallel rays are such as proceed equally distant from each other
through their whole course.

Converging rays are such as approach and tend to unite at any one
point, as at b.  Fig. 3.

Diverging rays are those which continue to recede from each other, as
at e.  Fig. 3.

A Focus is that point at which converging rays meet.

MOTION OF LIGHT--Rays of light are thrown off from luminous bodies in
every direction, but always in straight lines, which cross each other
at every point; but the particles of which each ray consists are so
minute that the rays do not appear to be impeded by each other.  A ray
of light passing through an aperture into a dark room, proceeds in a
straight line; a fact of which any one may be convinced by going into a
darkened room and admitting light only through a small aperture.

[Illustration: Fig. 1 (hipho_1.gif)]

Light also moves with great velocity, but becomes fainter as it recedes
from the source from which it eminates; in other words, diverging rays
of light diminish in intensity as the square of the distance increases.
For instance let a fig. 1, represent the luminous body from which light
proceeds, and suppose three square boards, b. c. d. severally one,
four and sixteen square inches in size be placed; b one foot, c two
feet, and d four feet from a, it will be perceived that the smallest
board b will throw c into shadow; that is, obstruct all rays of light
that would otherwise fall on c, and if b were removed c would in like
manner hide the light from d--Now, if b recieve as much light as would
fall on c whose surface is four times as large, the light must be four
times as powerful and sixteen times as powerful as that which would
fall on the second and third boards, because the same quantity of light
is diffused over a space four and sixteen times greater.  These same
rays may be collected and their intensity again increased.

Rays of light are reflected from one surface to another; Refracted, or
bent, as they pass from the surface of one transparent medium to
another; and Inflected, or turned from their course, by the attraction
of opaque bodies.  From the first we derive the principles on which
mirrors are constructed; to the second we are indebted for the power of
the lenses, and the blessings of sight,--for the light acts upon the
retina of the eye in the same manner as on the lens of a camera.  The
latter has no important bearing upon our subject.

When a ray of light falls perpendicularly upon an opaque body, it is
reflected bark in the same line in which it proceeds; in this case the
reflected ray returns in the same path the incident ray traversed; but
when a ray falls obliquely, it is reflected obliquely, that is, it is
thrown off in opposite direction, and as far from the perpendicular as
was the incident ray, as shown at Fig. 2; a representing the incident
ray and b the reflected.  The point, or angle c made by the incident
ray, at the surface of the reflector e f, with a line c d,
perpendicular to that surface, is called the angle of incidence, while
the angle formed by the reflected ray b and the perpendicular line d is
called the angle of reflection, and these angles are always equal.

[Illustration: Fig. 2 (hipho_2.gif)]

It is by this reflection of light that objects are made visible; but
unless light falls directly upon the eye they are invisible, and are
not sensibly felt until after a certain series of operations upon the
various coverings and humors of the eye.  Smooth and polished surfaces
reflect light most powerfully, and send to the eye the images of the
objects from which the light proceeded before reflection.  Glass, which
is transparent--transmitting light--would be of no use to us as a
mirror, were it not first coated on one side with a metalic amalgam,
which interrupts the rays in their passage from the glass into the air,
and throws them either directly in the incident line, or in an oblique
direction.  The reason why trees, rocks and animals are not all
mirrors, reflecting other forms instead of their own, is, that their
surfaces are uneven, and rays of light reflected from an uneven surface
are diffused in all directions.

Parallel rays falling obliquely upon a plane mirror are reflected
parallel; converging rays, with the same degree of convergence; and
diverging rays equally divergent.

Stand before a mirror and your image is formed therein, and appears to
be as far behind the glass as you are before it, making the angle of
reflection equal to that of incidence, as before stated.  The incident
ray and the reflected ray form, together, what is called the passage of
reflection, and this will therefore make the actual distance of an
image to appear as far again from the eye as it really is.  Any object
which reflects light is called a radiant.  The point behind a
reflecting surface, from which they appear to diverge, is called the
virtual focus.

Rays of light being reflected at the same angle at which they fall upon
a mirror, two persons can stand in such a position that each can see
the image of the other without seeing his own.  Again; you may see your
whole figure in a mirror half your length, but if you stand before one
a few inches shorter the whole cannot be reflected, as the incident ray
which passes from your feet into the mirror in the former case, will in
the latter fall under it.  Images are always reversed in mirrors.

Convex mirrors reflect light from a rounded surface and disperse the
rays in every direction, causing parallel rays to diverge, diverging
rays to diverge more, and converging rays to converge less--they
represent objects smaller than they really are--because the angle
formed by the reflected ray is rendered more acute by a convex than by
a plane surface, and it is the diminishing of the visual angle, by
causing rays of light to be farther extended before they meet in a
point, which produces the image of convex mirrors.  The greater the
convexity of a mirror, the more will the images of the objects be
diminished, and the nearer will they appear to the surface.  These
mirrors furnish science with many curious and pleasing facts.

Concave mirrors are the reverse of convex; the latter being rounded
outwards, the former hollowed inwards--they render rays of light more
converging--collect rays instead of dispersing them, and magnify
objects while the convex diminishes them.

Rays of light may be collected in the focus of a mirror to such
intensity as to melt metals.  The ordinary burning glass is an
illustration of this fact; although the rays of light are refracted, or
passed through the glass and concentrated into a focus beneath.

When incident rays are parallel, the reflected rays converge to a
focus, but when the incident rays proceed from a focus, or are
divergent, they are reflected parallel.  It is only when an object is
nearer to a concave mirror than its centre of concavity, that its image
is magnified; for when the object is farther from the mirror, this
centre will appear less than the object, and in an inverted position.

The centre of concavity in a concave mirror, is an imaginary point
placed in the centre of a circle formed by continuing the boundary of
the concavity of the mirror from any one point of the edge to another
parallel to and beneath it.

REFRACTION OF LIGHT:--I now pass to the consideration of the passage of
light through bodies.

A ray of light failing perpendicularly through the air upon a surface
of glass or water passes on in a straight line through the body; but if
it, in passing from one medium to another of different density, fall
obliquely, it is bent from its direct course and recedes from it,
either towards the right or left, and this bending is called
refraction; (see Fig. 3, b.) If a ray of light passes from a rarer into
a denser medium it is refracted towards a perpendicular in that medium;
but if it passes from a denser into rarer it is bent further from a
perpendicular in that medium.  Owing to this bending of the rays of
light the angles of refraction and incidence are never equal.

Transparent bodies differ in their power of bending light--as a general
rule, the refractive power is proportioned to the density--but the
chemical constitution of bodies as well as their density, is found to
effect their refracting power.  Inflammable bodies possess this power
to a great degree.

The sines of the angle of incidence and refraction (that is, the
perpendicular drawn from the extremity of an arc to the diameter of a
circle,) are always in the same ratio; viz:  from air into water, the
sine of the angle of refraction is nearly as four to three, whatever be
the position of the ray with respect to the refracting surface.  From
air into sulphur, the sine of the angle of refraction is as two to
one--therefore the rays of light cannot be refracted whenever the sine
of the angle of refraction becomes equal to the radius* of a circle,
and light falling very obliquely upon a transparent medium ceases to be
refracted; this is termed total reflection.

* The RADIUS of a circle is a straight line passing from the centre to
the circumference.

Since the brightness of a reflected image depends upon the quantity of
light, it is quite evident that those images which arise from total
reflection are by far the most vivid, as in ordinary cases of
reflection a portion of light is absorbed.

I should be pleased to enter more fully into this branch of the science
of optics, but the bounds to which I am necessarily limited in a work
of this kind will not admit of it.  In the next chapter, however, I
shall give a synopsis of Mr. Hunt's treatise on the "Influence of the
Solar Rays on Compound Bodies, with especial reference to their
Photographic application"--a work which should be in the hands of every
Daguerreotypist, and which I hope soon to see republished in this
country.  I will conclude this chapter with a brief statement of the
principles upon which the Photographic art is founded.

SOLAR and Stellar light contains three kinds of rays, viz:

1.  Colorific, or rays of color.

2.  Calorific, or rays of heat.

3.  Chemical rays, or those which produce chemical effects.

On the first and third the Photographic principle depends.  In
explaining this principle the accompanying wood cuts, (figs. 3 and 4)
will render it more intelligible.

If a pencil of the sun's rays fall upon a prism, it is bent in passing
through the transparent medium; and some rays being more refracted than
others, we procure an elongated image of the luminous beam, exhibiting
three distinct colors, red, yellow and blue, which are to be regarded
as primitives--and from their interblending, seven, as recorded by
Newton, and shown in the accompanying wood cut.  These rays being
absorbed, or reflected differently by various bodies, give to nature
the charm of color.  Thus to the eve is given the pleasure we derive in
looking upon the green fields and forests, the enumerable varieties of
flowers, the glowing ruby, jasper, topaz, amethist, and emerald, the
brilliant diamond, and all the rich and varied hues of nature, both
animate and inanimate.

[Illustration: Fig. 3 (hipho_3.gif)]

Now, if we allow this prismatic spectrum (b. Fig. 3.) to fall upon any
surface (as at c.) prepared with a sensitive photographic compound, we
shall find that the chemical effect produced bears no relation to the
intensity of the light of any particular colored ray, but that, on the
contrary, it is dispersed over the largest portion of the spectrum,
being most energetic in the least luminous rays, and ever active over
an extensive space, where no traces of light can be detected.  Fig. 4,
will give the student a better idea of this principle.  It is a copy of
the kind of impression which the spectrum, spoken of, would make on a
piece of paper covered with a very sensitive photographic preparation.
The white space a.  corresponds with the most luminous, or yellow ray,
(5, Fig. 3) over limits of which all chemical change is prevented.  A
similar action is also produced by the lower end of the red ray c; but
in the upper portion, however we find a decided change (as at d). The
most active chemical change, you will perceive, is produced by the rays
above the yellow a; viz. 4, 3, 2 and 1 (as at b) the green (4) being
the least active, and the blue (3) and violet (1) rays the most so, the
action still continuing far beyond the point b which is the end of the
luminous image.

[Illustration: Fig. 4 (hipho_4.gif)]

Suppose we wish to copy by the Daguerreotype, or Calotype process, any
objects highly colored--blue, red and yellow, for instance
predominating--the last of course reflects the most light, the blue the
least; but the rays from the blue surface will make the most intense
impression, whilst the red radiations are working very slowly, and the
yellow remains entirely inactive.  This accounts for the difficulty
experienced in copying bright green foliage, or warmly colored
portraits; a large portion of the yellow and red rays entering into the
composition of both--and the imperfections of a Daguerreotype portrait
of a person with a freckled face depends upon the same cause.

A yellow, hazy atmosphere, even when the light is very bright, will
effectually prevent any good photographic result--and in the height of
summer, with the most sensative process, it not unfrequently happens
that the most annoying failures arise from this agency of a yellow
medium.  A building painted of a yellow color, which may reflect the
sun's rays directly into the operator's room will have the same effect.
Daguerreotypists, being ignorant of these facts, are very apt to charge
their want of success to the plates, or chemicals, or any thing but the
real cause; and it would be well to bear these facts constantly in mind
and as far as possible avoid them.  This, may be accomplished, in a
measure, by a choice of location or by having the glass of your windows
tinged with blue; or a screen of thin blue paper may be interposed
between the light and sitter.  In selecting subjects, all striking
contrasts in color should be avoided, and sitters for portraits should
be cautioned not to wear anything that may produce the effect spoken
of--dark dresses always being the best.

The action of light both combines and decomposes bodies.  For instance,
chlorine and hydrogen will remain in a glass vessel without alteration
if kept in the dark; but if exposed to the rays of the sun, they
immediately enter into combination, and produce hydrochloric acid.  On
the other hand, if colorless nitric acid be exposed to the sun, it
becomes yellow, then changes to red, and oxygen is liberated by the
partial decomposition effected by the solar rays.

Of the organic substances none are more readily acted upon by light
than the various combinations of silver.

Of these some are more, and others less sensitive.  If Chloride of
silver, which is a white precipitate formed by adding chloride of
sodium (common salt) to a solution of nitrate of silver, be exposed to
diffused light, it speedily assumes a violet tint, and ultimately
becomes nearly black.  With iodide of silver, bromide of silver,
ammonio-nitrate of silver, and other salts of this metal, the result
will be much the same.

Some bodies, which under the influence of light, undergo chemical
changes, have the power of restoring themselves to their original
condition in the dark.  This is more remarkably displayed in the iodide
of platinum, which readily recieves a photogenic image by darkening
over the exposed surfaces, but speedily loses it by bleaching in the
dark.  The ioduret of Daguerre's plate, and some other iodides, exhibit
the same peculiarity--This leads us to the striking fact, that bodies
which have undergone a change of estate under the influence of
day-light have some latent power by which they can renovate themselves.
Possibly the hours of night are as necessary to inanimate nature as
they are to the animate.  During the day, an excitement which we do not
heed, unless in a state of disease, is maintained by the influence of
light and the hours of repose, during which the equilibrium is
restored, are absolutely necessary to the continuance of health.

Instead of a few chemical compounds of gold and silver, which at first
were alone supposed to be photographic, we are now aware that copper,
platinum, lead, nickel, and indeed, probably all the elements, are
equally liably to change under the sun's influence.  This fact may be
of benefit to engravers, for if steel can be made to take photographic
impressions, the more laborious process of etching may be dispensed
with.  In fact, in the latter part of this work, a process is described
for etching and taking printed impressions from Daguerreotype plates.
As yet this process has produced no decided beneficial results--but
future experiments may accomplish some practical discovery of intrinsic
value to the art of engraving.

A very simple experiment will prove how essential light is to the
coloring of the various species comprising the vegetable and animal
kingdoms.  If we transplant any shrub from the light of day into a dark
cellar, we will soon see it lose its bright green color, and become
perfectly white.

Another effect of light is that it appears to impart to bodies some
power by which they more readily enter into chemical combination with
others.  We have already said that chlorine and hydrogen, if kept in
the dark, will remain unaltered; but if the chlorine alone be
previously exposed to the sun, the chlorine thus solarised will unite
with the hydrogen in the dark.  Sulphate of iron will throw down gold
or silver from their solutions slowly in the dark; but if either
solution be first exposed to sunshine, and the mixture be then made, in
the dark, the precipitation takes place instantly.  Here is again,
evidence of either an absorption of some material agent from the
sunbeam, or an alteration in the chemical constitution of the body.  It
was from understanding these principles and applying them that
philosophers were enabled to produce the Calotype, Daguerreotype, &c.
For the effects and action of light on the camera, see Chapter V.

Some advances have been made towards producing Photographic impressions
in color--the impossibility of which some of our best and oldest
artists have most pertinaciously maintained.  The colored image of the
spectrum has been most faithfully copied, ray for ray, on paper spread
with the juice of the Cochorus Japonica, (a species of plant) and the
fluoride of silver; and on silver plate covered with a thin film of
chloride.  The day may be still remote when this much to be desired
desideratum shall be accomplished in portrait taking; but I am led to
hope that future experiments may master the secret which now causes it
to be looked upon, by many, as an impossibility.

That great advantages have resulted, and that greater still will result
from the discovery of the Photographic art, few will deny.  The
faithful manner in which it copies nature, even to the most minute
details, renders it of much value to the painter; but a few minutes
sufficing to take a view that formerly would have occupied several
days.  Its superiority in portraits, over miniature or oil painting has
been tacitly acknowledged by the thousands who employ it to secure
their own, or a friends likeness, and by the steady increase in the
number of artists who are weekly, aye daily springing up in every town
and village in the land.



CHAP. III.

SYNOPSIS OF MR. HUNT'S TREATISE ON "THE INFLUENCE OF THE SOLAR RAYS ON
COMPOUND BODIES, WITH ESPECIAL REFERENCE TO THEIR PHOTOGRAPHIC
APPLICATION."


OXIDE OF SILVER exposed for a few hours to good sunshine, passes into a
more decided olive color, than characterises it when first prepared by
precipitation from nitrate of silver.  Longer exposure renders this
color very much lighter, and the covered parts, are found much darker,
than those on which the light has acted directly.  In some instances
where the oxide of silver has been spread on the paper a decided
whitening process in some parts, after a few days exposure, is noticed.
Oxide of silver dissolved in ammonia is a valuable photographic fluid;
one application of a strong solution forming an exceedingly sensitive
surface.  The pictures on this paper are easily fixed by salt or weak
ammonia.

NITRATE OF SILVER.--This salt in a state of purity, does not appear to
be sensibly affected by light, but the presence of the smallest portion
of organic matter renders it exceedingly liable to change under
luminous influence.

If a piece of nitrated paper is placed upon hot iron, or held near the
fire, it will be found that at a heat just below that at which the
paper chars, the salt is decomposed.  Where the heat is greatest, the
silver is revived, and immediately around it, the paper becomes a deep
blue; beyond this a pretty decided green color results, and beyond the
green, a yellow or yellow brown stain is made.  This exhibits a
remarkable analogy between heat and light,--before spoken of in chap.
II--and is of some practical importance in the preparation of the paper.

PRISMATIC ANALYSIS.--The method of accomplishing the prismatic
decomposition of rays of light by the spectrum has already been
described on pages 22 and 23.  The color of the impressed spectrum, on
paper washed with nitrate of silver, is at first, a pale brown, which
passes slowly into a deeper shade; that portion corresponding with the
blue rays becoming a blue brown; and under the violet of a peculiar
pinkey shade, a very decided green tint, on the point which corresponds
with the least refrangible blue rays, may be observed, its limits of
action being near the centre of the yellow ray, and its maximum about
the centre of the blue, although the action up to the edge of the
violet ray is continued with very little diminution of effect; beyond
this point the action is very feeble.

When the spectrum is made to act on paper which has been previously
darkened, by exposure to sunshine under cupro-sulphate of ammonia, the
phenomena are materially different.  The photographic spectrum is
lengthened out on the red or negative side by a faint but very visible
red portion, which extends fully up to the end of the red rays, as seen
by the naked eye.  The tint of the general spectrum, too, instead of
brown is dark grey, passing, however, at its most refracted or positive
end into a ruddy brown.

In its Photographic application, the nitrate of silver is the most
valuable of the salts of that metal, as from it most of the other
argentine compounds can be prepared, although it is not of itself
sufficiently sensible to light to render it of much use.

CHLORIDE OF SILVER.--This salt of silver, whether in its precipitated
state, or when fused, changes its color to a fine bluish grey by a very
short exposure to the sun's rays.  If combined with a small quantity of
nitrate, the change is more rapid, it attains a deep brown, then slowly
passes into a fine olive, and eventually, after a few weeks, the
metalic silver is seen to be revived on the surface of the salt.  Great
differences of color are produced on chlorides of silver precipitated
by different muriates.  Nearly every variety in combination with the
nitrate, becomes at last of the same olive color, the following
examples, therefore, have reference to a few minutes exposure, only, to
good sunshine; it must also be recollected that the chloride of silver
in these cases is contaminated with the precipitant.

Muriate of ammonia precipitates chloride to darken to a fine chocolate
brown, whilst muriate of lime produces a brick-red color.  Muriates of
potash and soda afford a precipitate, which darkens speedily to a pure
dark brown, and muriatic acid, or aqueous chlorine, do not appear to
increase the darkening power beyond the lilac to which the pure
chloride of silver changes by exposure.  This difference of color
appears to be owing to the admixture of the earth or alkali used with
the silver salt.

The prismatic impression on paper spread with the chloride of silver is
often very beautifully tinted, the intensity of color varying with the
kind of muriate used.  Spread paper with muriate of ammonia or baryta
and you obtain a range of colors nearly corresponding with the natural
hues of the prismatic spectrum.  Under favorable circumstances the mean
red ray, leaves a red impression, which passes into a green over the
space occupied by the yellow rays.  Above this a leaden hue is
observed, and about the mean blue ray, where the action is greatest, it
rapidly passes through brown into black, and through the most
refrangible rays it gradually declines into a bluish brown, which tint
is continued throughout the invisible rays.  At the least refrangible
end of the spectrum, the very remarkable phenomenon has been observed,
of the extreme red rays exerting a protecting influence, and preserving
the paper from that change, which it would otherwise undergo, under the
influence of the dispersed light which always surrounds the spectrum.
Not only the extreme red ray exerts this very peculiar property, but
the ordinary red ray through nearly its whole length.

In photographic drawing this salt is of the utmost importance.  Mr.
Talbot's application of it will be given hereafter in another portion
of this work.

IODIDE OF SILVER--Perfectly pure, undergoes very little change under
the influence of light or heat; but if a very slight excess of the
nitrate of silver be added it becomes infinitely more sensitive than
the chloride.

The spectrum impressed upon paper prepared with a weak solution of the
hydriodate of potash presents some very remarkable peculiarities.  The
maximum of intensity is found at the edge of the most refrangible
violet rays, or a little beyond it, varying slightly according to the
kind of paper used, and the quantity of free nitrate of silver present.
The action commences at a point nearly coincident with the mean red of
the luminous spectrum, where it gives a dull ash or lead color, while
the most refrangible rays impress a ruddy snuff-brown, the change of
tint coming on rather suddenly about the end of the blue or beginning
of the violet rays of the luminous spectrum.  Beyond the extreme violet
rays, the action rapidly diminishes, but the darkening produced by
these invisible rays, extends a very small space beyond the point at
which they cease to act on the chloride of silver.

In its photographic application, it is, alone, of very little use; but
in combination with other reagents it becomes exquisitely sensitive.
With gallic acid and the ferrocyanate of potash it forms two of the
most sensitive photographic solutions with which we are acquainted.
These are used in the calotype process.

IODURET OF SILVER.--If upon a plate of polished silver we place a small
piece of iodine, and apply the heat of a lamp beneath the plate for a
moment, a system of rings is speedily formed.  The first ring, which
spreading constantly forms the exterior of the circle, is of a bright
yellow color; within this, there arises, successively, rings of green,
red and blue colors, and then again a fine yellow circle, centred by a
greyish spot on the place occupied by the iodine.  On exposing these to
the light, the outer yellow circle almost instantly changes color, the
others slowly, in the order of their position, the interior yellow
circle resisting for a long time the solar influence.  These rings must
be regarded as films of the ioduret of silver, varying, not only in
thickness, but in the more or less perfect states of combination in
which the iodine and metal are.  The exterior circle is an ioduret in a
very loose state of chemical agregation; the attractive forces increase
as we proceed towards the centre, where a well formed ioduret, or
probably a true iodide of silver, is formed, which is acted upon by
sunlight with difficulty.  The exterior and most sensitive film
constitutes the surface of Daguerreotype plates.  The changes which
these colored rings undergo are remarkable; by a few minutes exposure
to sunlight, an inversion of nearly all the colors takes place, the two
first rings becoming a deep olive green; and a deep blue inclining to
black.

The nature of the change which the ioduret of silver undergoes on
Daguerreotype plates, through the action of light, Mr. Hunt considers
to be a decided case of decomposition, and cites several circumstances
in proof of his position.  These with other facts given by Mr. Hunt in
his great work on the Photographic art, but to voluminous to include in
a volume of the size to which I am obliged to confine myself, should be
thoroughly studied by all Daguerreotypists.

PRISMATIC ANALYSIS.--The most refrangible portion of the spectrum, (on
a Daguerreotype plate) appears, after the plate has been exposed to the
vapor of mercury, to have impressed its colors; the light and delicate
film of mercury, which covers that portion, assuming a fine blue tint
about the central parts, which are gradually shaded off into a pale
grey; and this is again surrounded by a very delicate rose hue, which
is lost in a band of pure white.  Beyond this a protecting influence is
powerfully exerted; and notwithstanding the action of the dispersed
light, which is very evident over the plate, a line is left, perfectly
free from mercurial vapor, and which, consequently, when viewed by a
side light, appears quite dark.  The green rays are represented by a
line of a corresponding tint, considerably less in size than the
luminous green rays.  The yellow rays appear to be without action, or
to act negatively, the space upon which they fall being protected from
the mercurial vapor; and it consequently is seen as a dark band.  A
white line of vapor marks the place of the orange rays.  The red rays
effect the sensitive surface in a peculiar manner; and we have the
mercurial vapor, assuming a molecular arrangement which gives to it a
fine rose hue; this tint is surrounded by a line of white vapor, shaded
at the lowest extremity with a very soft green.  Over the space
occupied by the extreme red rays, a protecting influence is again
exerted; the space is retained free from mercurial vapor and the band
is found to surround the whole of the least refrangible rays, and to
unite itself with the band which surrounds the rays of greatest
refrangibility.  This band is not equally well defined throughout its
whole extent.  It is most evident from the extreme red to the green; it
fades in passing through the blue, and increases again, as it leaves
the indigo, until beyond the invisible chemical rays it is nearly as
strong as it is at the calorific end of the spectrum.

Images on Daguerreotype plates which have been completely obliterated
by rubbing may be restored, by placing it in a tolerably strong
solution of iodine in water.

BROMIDE OF SILVER.--This salt, like the iodide, does not appear to be
readily changed by the action of light; but when combined with the
nitrate of silver it forms a very sensitive photographic preparation.

Paper prepared with this salt, blackens over its whole extent with
nearly equal intensity, when submitted to the prismatic spectrum.  The
most characteristic peculiarity of the spectrum is its extravagant
length.  Instead of terminating at the mean yellow ray, the darkened
portion extends down to the very extremity of the visible red rays.  In
tint it is pretty uniformly of a grey-black over its whole extent,
except that a slight fringe of redness is perceptible at the least
refracted end.  Beyond the red ray, an extended space is protected from
the agency of the dispersed light, and its whiteness maintained; thus
confirming the evidence of some chemical power in action, over a space
beyond the luminous spectrum, which corresponds with the rays of the
least refrangibility.

This salt is extensively used in photographic drawing.

PREPARATIONS OF GOLD.--Chloride of Gold, freed from an excess of acid
is slowly changed under the action of light; a regularly increasing
darkness taking place until it becomes purple, the first action of the
light being to whiten the paper, which, if removed from the light at
this stage, will gradually darken and eventually develope the picture.
This process may be quickened by placing the paper in cold water.

Chloride of gold with nitrate of silver gives a precipitate of a yellow
brown color.  Paper impregnated with the acetate of lead, when washed
with perfectly neutral chloride of gold, acquires a brownish-yellow
hue.  The first impression of light seems rather to whiten than darken
the paper, by discharging the original color, and substituting for it a
pale greyish tint, which by slow degrees increases to a dark slate
color; but if arrested, while yet, not more than a moderate ash grey,
and held in a current of steam, the color of the parts acted upon by
light--and of that only--darkens immediately to a deep purple.

Here I must leave the subject of the action of light upon metalic
compounds--referring to Mr. Hunts work for any further information the
student may desire on the other metals--as I find myself going beyond
my limits.  I cannot, however, entirely dismiss the subject without
giving a few examples of the action of light on the juices of plants,
some of which produce very good photographic effect.

CORCHORUS JAPONICA--The juice of the flowers of this plant impart a
fine yellow color to paper, and, so far as ascertained, is the most
sensitive of any vegetable preparation; but owing to its continuing to
change color even in the dark, photographic images taken on paper
prepared with it soon fade out.

WALL FLOWER.--This flower yields a juice, when expressed with alcohol,
from which subsides, on standing, a bright yellow finely divided
faecula, leaving a greenish-yellow transparent liquid, only slightly
colored supernatant.  The faecula spreads well on paper, and is very
sensitive to light, but appears at the same time to undergo a sort of
chromatic analysis, and to comport itself as if composed of two very
distinct coloring principles, very differently affected.  The one on
which the intensity and sub-orange tint of the color depends, is
speedily destroyed, but the paper is not thereby fully whitened.  A
paler yellow remains as a residual tint, and this on continued exposure
to the light, slowly darkens to brown.  Exposed to the spectrum, the
paper is first reduced nearly to whiteness in the region of the blue
and violet rays.  More slowly, an insulated solar image is whitened in
the less refrangible portion of the red.  Continue the exposure, and a
brown impression begins to be percieved in the midst of the white
streak, which darkens slowly over the region between the lower blue and
extreme violet rays.

THE RED POPPY yields a very beautiful red color, which is entirely
destroyed by light.  When perfectly dried on paper the color becomes
blue.  This blue color is speedily discharged by exposure to the sun's
rays, and papers prepared with it afford very interesting
photographs.--  Future experiments will undoubtedly more fully develope
the photogenic properties of flowers, and practically apply them.

Certain precautions are necessary in extracting the coloring matter of
flowers.  The petals of fresh flowers, carefully selected, are crushed
to a pulp in a mortar, either alone or with the addition of a little
alcohol, and the juice expressed by squeezing the pulp in a clean linen
or cotton cloth.  It is then to be spread upon paper with a flat brush,
and dried in the air.  If alcohol be not added, it must be applied
immediately, as the air changes or destroys the color instantly.

Most flowers give out their coloring matter to alcohol or water--but
the former is found to weaken, and in some cases to discharge
altogether these colors; but they are in most cases restored in drying.
Paper tinged with vegetable colors must be kept perfectly dry and in
darkness.

To secure an eveness of tint on paper it should be first moistened on
the back by sponging, and blotting off with bibulous paper.  It should
then be pinned on a board, the moist side downwards, so that two of its
edges--the right and lower ones--project a little over those of the
board.  Incline the board twenty or thirty degrees to the horizon, and
apply the tincture with a brush in strokes from right to left, taking
care not to go over the edges which rests on the board, but to pass
clearly over those that project; and also observing to carry the tint
from below upwards by quick sweeping strokes, leaving no dry spaces
between them.  Cross these with other strokes from above downwards,
leaving no floating liquid on the paper.  Dry as quickly as possible,
avoiding, however, such heat as may injure the tint.



CHAP. IV.

A FEW HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS TO DAGUERREOTYPISTS.


There are very few who may not be capable of practising the
Photographic art, either on paper, or metalic plates--but, like all
other professions, some are more clever in its various processes than
others.

Impatience is a great drawback to perfect success, and combined with
laziness is a decided enemy.  Besides this, no one can excel in
Photography who does not possess a natural taste for the fine arts, who
is not quick in discerning grace and beauty--is regardless of the
principles of perspective, foreshortening and other rules of drawing,
and who sets about it merely for the sake of gain--without the least
ambition to rise to the first rank, both in its practice and theory.
There is no profession or trade in which a slovenly manner will not
show itself, and none where its effects will be more apparent than this.

In order to be great in any pursuit, we must be ourselves, and keep all
things, in order.  In your show and reception rooms, let neatness
prevail; have your specimens so placed--leaning slightly forward--as
to obtain the strongest light upon them, and at the same time prevent
that glassiness of appearance which detracts so materially from the
effect they are intended to produce.  If possible, let the light be of
a north-western aspect, mellowed by curtains of a semitransparent hue.
Your show-cases, at the door, should be kept well cleaned.  I have
often been disgusted while attempting to examine portraits in the cases
of our artists, at the greasy coating and marks of dirty fingers upon
the glass and frame enclosing them.  Believe it, many a good customer
is lost for no other reason.

In your operating room, dust should be carefully excluded.  It should
be furnished with nothing apt to collect and retain dust; a carpet is
therefore not only a useless article, but very improper.  A bare floor
is to be prefered; but if you must cover it use matting.  There is no
place about your establishment where greater care should be taken to
have order and cleanliness; for it will prevent many failures often
attributed to other causes.  "A place for every thing, and every thing
in its place," should be an absolute maxim with all artists.  Do not
oblige the ladies, on going away from your rooms, to say--"That H. is a
slovenly man; see how my dress is ruined by sitting down in a chair
that looked as if it had just come out of a porter house kitchen and
had not been cleaned for six months."

In choosing your operating room, obtain one with a north-western
aspect, if possible; and either with, or capable of having attached, a
large skylight.  Good pictures may be taken without the sky-light, but
not the most pleasing or effective.

A very important point to be observed, is to keep the camera perfectly
free from dust.  The operator should be careful to see that the
slightest particle be removed, for the act of inserting the
plate-holder will set it in motion, if left, and cause those little
black spots on the plate, by which an otherwise good picture is
spoiled.  The camera should be so placed as to prevent the sun shining
into the lenses.

In taking portraits, the conformation of the sitter should be minutely
studied to enable you to place her or him in a position the most
graceful and easy to be obtained.  The eyes should be fixed on some
object a little above the camera, and to one side--but never into, or
on the instrument, as some direct; the latter generally gives a fixed,
silly, staring, scowling or painful expression to the face.  Care
should also be taken, that the hands and feet, in whatever position,
are not too forward or back ward from the face when that is in good
focus.

If any large surface of white is present, such as the shirt front, or
lady's handkerchief, a piece of dark cloth (a temporary bosom of
nankeen is best,) may be put over it, but quickly withdrawn when the
process is about two thirds finished.

A very pleasing effect is given to portraits, by introducing, behind
the sitter, an engraving or other picture--if a painting, avoid those
in which warm and glowing tints predominate.  The subject of these
pictures may be applicable to the taste or occupation of the person
whose portrait you are taking.  This adds much to the interest of the
picture, which is otherwise frequently dull, cold and inanimate.

Mr. J. H. Whitehurst of Richmond, Va., has introduced a revolving
background, which is set in motion during the operation, and produces a
distinctness and boldness in the image not otherwise to be obtained.
The effect upon the background of the plate is equally pleasing; it
having the appearance of a beautifully clouded sky.

In practising Photographic drawing on paper, the student must bear in
mind that it is positively essential, to secure success in the various
processes, to use the utmost precaution in spreading the solutions, and
washes from the combination of which the sensitive surfaces result.
The same brush should always be used for the same solution, and never
used for any other, and always washed in clean water after having been
employed.  Any metalic mounting on the brushes should be avoided, as
the metal precipitates the silver from its solution.  The brushes
should be made of camels or badger's hair and sufficiently broad and
large to cover the paper in two or three sweeps; for if small ones be
employed, many strokes must be given, which leave corresponding streaks
that will become visible when submitted to light, and spoil the picture.

These few preliminary hints and suggestions, will, I trust, be of some
service to all who adopt this pleasing art as a profession; and will,
with a due attention to the directions given in the practical working
of the Daguerreotype, Calotype, etc., ensure a corresponding measure of
success.



CHAP. V.

DAGUERREOTYPE APPARATUS.


The entire Daguerreotype process is comprised in seven distinct
operations; viz:

1.--Cleaning and polishing the plate.

2.--Applying the sensitive coating.

3--Submitting the plate to the action of light in the camera.

4.--Bringing out the picture; in other words rendering it visible.

5.--Fixing the image, or making it permanent--so that the light may no
longer act upon it.

6.--Gilding:  or covering the picture with a thin film of gold--which
not only protects it, but greatly improves its distinctness and tone of
color.

7.--Coloring the picture.

For these various operations the following articles--which make up the
entire apparatus of a Daguerrean artist--must be procured

1.--THE CAMERA.--(Fig. 5.). The Camera Obscura of the Italian
philosophers, although highly appreciated, on account of the magical
character of the pictures it produced, remained little other than a
scientific toy, until the discovery of M. Daguerre.  The value of this
instrument is now great, and the interest of the process which it so
essentially aids, universally admitted.  A full description of it will
therefore be interesting.

[Illustration: Fig. 5 (hipho_5.gif)]

The camera is a dark box (a), having a tube with lenses (b) placed in
one end of it, through which the radiations from external objects pass,
and form a diminished picture upon the ground glass (g) placed at the
proper distance in the box to receive it; the cap c covering the lenses
at b until the plate is ready to receive the image of the object to be
copied.

Thus a (fig. 6.) representing the lens, and b the object desired to be
represented, the rays (c, c) proceeding from it fall upon the lens, and
are transmitted to a point, which varies with the curvature of the
glass, where an inverted image (d) of b is very accurately formed.  At
this point, termed the focus, the sensitive photographic material is
placed for the purpose of obtaining the required picture.

[Illustration: Fig. 5 (hipho_6.gif)]

The great desideratum in a photographic camera is perfect lenses.  They
should be achromatic, and the utmost transparency should be obtained;
and under the closest inspection of the glass not the slightest wavy
appearance, or dark spot should be detected; and a curvature which as
much as possible prevents spherical aberration should be secured.  The
effect produced by this last defect is a convergence of perpendiculars,
as for instance; two towers of any building, would be represented as
leaning towards each other; and in a portrait the features would seem
contracted, distorted and mingled together, so as to throw the picture
out of drawing and make it look more like a caricature than a likeness.
If the lens be not achromatic, a chromatic aberration takes place,
which produces an indistinct, hazy appearance around the edges of the
picture, arising from the blending of the rays.

The diameter and focal length of a lens must depend in a great measure
on the distance of the object, and also on the superficies of the plate
or paper to be covered.  For portraits one of 1 1/2 inches diameter,
and from 4 1/2 to 5 1/2 inches focus may be used; but for distant
views, one from 2 inches to 3 inches diameter, and from 8 to 12 inches
focal length will answer much better.  For single lenses, the aperture
in front should be placed at a distance from it, corresponding to the
diameter, and of a size not more than one third of the same.  A variety
of movable diaphragms or caps, to cover the aperture in front, are very
useful, as the intensity of the light may be modified by them and more
or less distinctness and clearness of delineation obtained.  These caps
alway come with Voitlander instruments and should be secured by the
purchaser.

Though the single acromatic lens answers very well for copying
engravings; taking views from nature or art, for portraits the double
should always be used.  The extensive manufacture of the most approved
cameras, both in Europe and in this country, obviates all necessity for
any one attempting to construct one for their own use.  Lenses are now
made so perfect by some artisans that, what is called the "quick
working camera" will take a picture in one second, while the ordinary
cameras require from eight to sixty.

The camera in most general use is that manufactured by Voitlander and
Son of Germany.  Their small size consists of two seperate acromatic
lenses; the first, or external one, has a free aperture of 1 1/2
inches; the second, or internal, 1 5/8 inches; and both have the same
focus, viz:  5 3/4 inches.  The larger size differs from the smaller.
The inner lens is an achromatic 3 1/4 inches diameter, its focal length
being 30 inches.  The outer lens is a meniscus--that is bounded by a
concave and convex spherical surface which meet--having a focal length
of 18 inches.  For every distant view, the aperture in front is
contracted by a diaphram to 1/8 of an inch.  By this means the light is
reflected with considerable intensity and the clearness and correctness
of the pictures are truly surprising.

THE AMERICA instruments are constructed on the same principle and many
of them are equally perfect.  Mr. Edward Anthony of 205 Broadway, New
York city, has constructed, and sold cameras fully equal to the German
and for which Voitlander instruments have been refused in exchange by
the purchaser.

The ordinary camera box (see fig. 5, a) varies in size to suit the
tube, and is termed medium, half, or whole.  Within the box is a slide
to assist in regulating the focus, and in enlarging or diminishing the
picture.  In one end of this slide is a springed groove into which the
ground-glass spectrum (g fig. 5) is slid, for the purpose of more
conveniently arranging the focus.  After the plate is prepared it is
placed in the holder--partly seen at e, fig. 5, and covered with the
dark slide f, fig. 5; the spectrum is then withdrawn and the holder
takes its place, and the lids d, d, are closed after removing the dark
slide f.  The plate is now ready to receive the image, and the cap c
may be removed to admit the light into the box.

A camera constructed by Voitlander is thus described by Mr. Fisher.
"It is made entirely of brass, so that variations of climate has no
effect upon it.  It is very portable and when packed in its box, with
all the necessary apparatus and materials for practising the
Daguerreotype art, occupies but very little space.  It is not, however,
well adapted for the Calotype process."

[Illustration: Fig. 7 (hipho_7.gif)]

"The brass foot A (fig. 7.), is placed on a table, or other firm
support, and the pillar B. screwed into it; the body of the camera, C,
C is laid into the double forked bearing D. D. The instrument is now
properly adjusted by means of the set screws, e, e, e, in the brass
foot, or it may be raised, lowered, or moved, by the telescope stand,
and when correct, fixed by the screw b.  The landscape to be delineated
is viewed either through the small lens, g, or with the naked eye on
the ground glass plate H, the focus being adjusted by the screw I. The
optical part of the instrument consist of the small set of achromatic
lenses already described.  When the portrait or view is deliniated on
the ground glass to the entire satisfaction of the operator, the brass
cap L is placed over the lens, and the entire body is removed away into
the dark, taking care not to disturb the position of the stand.  The
body is now detached at the part H, and the prepared paper or plate
enclosed in the brass frame work introduced in its place; the whole is
again placed upon the pedestal, the brass cap L is removed, by which
the paper or plate is exposed to the full influence of the light, after
which the cap is again replaced.

Mr. Woodbridge, of this city, has constructed an instrument for taking
full length portraits on plates 10 by 13 inches, which is worthy of
some notice.  It is a double camera, consisting of two boxes, placed in
a frame, one above the other, and so arranged as to slide easily up and
down.  After the focus has been adjusted, on the object, in both
cameras, the plate is put into the upper box, in the manner already
described, until the superior portion of the figure is complete; it is
then placed in the second box and the lower extremities obtained.  The
adjustment of the instrument is so complete that a perfect union of the
parts is effected in the picture without the least possible line of
demarkation being visible.  Fig. 8 gives a front view of this
instrument.

[Illustration: Fig. 8 (hipho_8.gif)]

Fig. 9 represents Talbot's Calotype Camera,--a very beautiful
instrument.

The copying camera box has an extra slide in the back end, by which it
may be considerably lengthened at pleasure.

II.--CAMERA STAND.--The best constructed stands are made of maple or
black walnut wood, having a cast iron socket (a, Fig. 12,) through
which the sliding rod b passes, and into which the legs c, c, with iron
screw ferules are inserted.  The platform d is made of two pieces,
hinged together, as at e, and having a thumb screw for the purpose of
elevating or depressing the instrument.

[Illustration: Fig. 9 (hipho_9.gif)]

III. MERCURY BATH.--Fig. 13 gives a front view of the mercury bath now
in general use in this country for mercurializing and bringing out the
picture.  It is quite an improvement on those first used.  To make it
more portable it is in three pieces, a b and c; having a groove e on
one side to receive the thermometre tube and scale by which the proper
degree of heating the mercury is ascertained.  Into the top are nicely
fitted two or three iron frames, with shoulders, for the plate to rest
in, suitable for the different sizes of plates.  The bath is heated by
means of a spirit lamp placed under it.  From two to four ounces of
highly purified mercury are put into the bath at a time.

IV. PLATE BLOCKS AND VICES.--There are several kinds of this article in
use; I shall describe the two best only.

[Illustration: Fig. 10 (hipho_10.gif)]

Fig. 10 gives an idea of the improvement on the English hand block.
The top a is perfectly flat and smooth--a little smaller than the
plate, so as to permit the latter to project a very little all
around--having at opposite angles c c two clasps, one fixed the other
moveable, but capable of being fastened by the thumb screw d, so as to
secure the plate tightly upon the block.  This block turns upon a
swivle, b, which is attached to the table by the screw c, This block is
only used for holding the plate while undergoing the first operation in
cleaning.

[Illustration: Fig. 11 (hipho_11.gif)]

Fig. 11, shows the form of Lewis' newly patented plate vice, which for
durability, simplicity and utility is preferable to all others.  It
consists of a simple platform and arm of cast iron, the former, a,
having a groove, d, in the centre for fixing the different sizes of
plate beds, e--and the latter supporting the leaves, e f.  On this vice
which is secured to a table, or bench, the plate receives its finishing
polish with rouge, or prepared lampblack.  Mr. Lewis gives the
following directions for its use.  "As the cam wears tighten it with
the adjusting screw (g) so as to allow the lever (f) to fall back into
a horizontal position; the plate being in its place at the time.  Oil
the wearing parts occasionally."

Some Daguerreotypists, however, use a foot lathe with buff wheels of
various forms; but this vice is sufficient for all ordinary purposes.

[Illustration: Fig. 12 (hipho_12.gif)]

[Illustration: Fig. 13 (hipho_13.gif)]

V. COATING BOXES.--The usual form for iodine and bromine boxes is see,
at figs. 14 and 15.  They are far superior to those in use with the
English operators.  Each consists of a wooden box (a,) having firmly
embeded within it a stout glass jar (c), the edges of which are ground.
Over this is placed the sliding cover b, double the length of the box,
one half occupied by a piece of ground glass (e), tightly pressed upon
the glass pot by a spring (i) beneath the cross bar g, and fits the pot
so accurately that it effectually prevents the escape of the vapor of
the iodine, bromine or other accelerating liquid contained therein.
The other half of the lid is cut through, shoulders being left at the
four angles for the different sizes of frames, designed to recieve the
plate while undergoing the coating process.  When the plate is put into
the frame, the cover b is shoved under the second lid h and when coated
to the proper degree, it resumes its former position and the plate is
placed in the holder of the camera box.  To test the tightness of the
box, light a piece of paper, put it into the pot and cover it with the
sliding lid.  The burning paper expels the air from the pot, and if it
be perfectly tight you may raise the whole box by the lid.

VI. GLASS FUNNELS.--Are a necessary article to the Daguerreotypist, for
filtering water, solutions, &c.

[Illustration: Fig. 14 (hipho_14.gif)]

VII. GILDING STAND.--For nervous persons the gilding stand is a useful
article.  It is adjusted to a perfect level by thumb screws placed in
its base.

VIII. SPIRIT LAMPS.--The most useful and economical of those made are
the Britania, as they are less liable to break; and the tube for the
wick being fastened to the body by a screw renders it less liable to
get out of order or explode.  Glass is the cheapest, and for an amateur
will do very well, but for a professed artist the Britania should
always be obtained.

IX.  COLOR BOX.--These are generally found on sale at the shops, and
usually contain eight colors, four brushes and a gold cup.  The artist
would, however, do well to obtain, all the colors mentioned in the last
chapter of this work, and be sure to get the very best, as there are
various qualities of the same color, particularly carmine, which is
very expensive, and the cupidity of some may induce them to sell a poor
article for the sake of larger profits.

[Illustration: Fig. 15 (hipho_15.gif)]

STILL.--Daguerreotypists should always use distilled water for
solutions, and washing the plate, as common water holds various
substances in solution which detract very materially from the
excellence of a photograph, and often gives much trouble, quite
unaccountable to many.  For the purpose of distilling water the
apparatus represented at Fig. 16 is both convenient and economical.

It may be either wholly of good stout tin, or of sheet iron tinned on
the inside, and may be used over a common fire, or on a stove.  A is
the body, which may be made to hold from one to four gallons of water,
which is introduced at the opening b, which is then stopped by a cork.
The tube d connects the neck a of the still with the worm tub, or
refrigerator B, at e, which is kept filled with cold water by means of
the funnel c, and drawn off as fast as it becomes warm by the cock f.
The distilled water is condensed in the worm--and passes off at the
cock b, under which a bottle, or other vessel, should be placed to
receive it.  The different joints are rendered tight by lute, or in its
absence, some stiff paste spread upon a piece of linen and wrapped
around them will answer very well; an addition of sealing wax over all
will make them doubly secure.

[Illustration: Fig. 16 (hipho_16.gif)]

HYGROMETER.--This is an instrument never to be found, I believe, in the
rooms of our operators, although it would be of much use to them, for
ascertaining the quantity of moisture floating about the room; and as
it is necessary to have the atmosphere as dry as possible to prevent an
undue absorption of this watery vapor by the iodine &c., and to procure
good pictures,--its detection becomes a matter of importance.  Mason's
hygrometer, manufactured by Mr. Roach and sold by Mr. Anthony, 205
Broadway, New York is the best in use.

It consists of two thermometre tubes placed, side by side, on a metalic
scale, which is graduated equally to both tubes.  The bulb of one of
these tubes communicates, by means of a net-work of cotton, with a
glass reservoir of water attached to the back of the scale.  Fig. 17
and 18 represent a front and back view of this instrument.

Fig. 17 is the front view, showing the tubes with their respective
scales; the bulb b being covered with the network of cotton
communicating with the reservoir c fig. 18, at d.

[Illustration: Fig. 17 (hipho_17.gif)]

[Illustration: Fig. 18 (hipho_18.gif)]

The evaporation of the water from this bulb decreases the temperature
of the mercury in the tube b in proportion to the dryness of the
atmosphere, and the number of degrees the tube b indicates below that
of the other, shows the real state of the atmosphere in the room; for
instance, if b stands at forty and a at sixty-one the room is in a
state of extreme dryness, the difference of twenty-one degrees between
the thermometers--let a stand at any one point--gives this result.  If
they do not differ, or there is only four or five degrees variation,
the atmosphere of the room is very moist and means should be taken to
expel the superfluous quantity.

HEAD RESTS.--The button head rest with chair back clip, A fig.  19--is
much the best for travelling artists, as it can be taken apart, into
several pieces and closely packed; is easily and firmly fixed to the
back of a chair by the clamp and screw a and b, and is readily adjusted
to the head, as the buttons c, c and arms d, d are movable.

Sometimes the button rest is fixed to a pole, which is screwed to the
chair; but this method is not so secure and solid as the clip and
occupies more room in packing.  Both the pole and clip, are furnished
in some cases with brass band rests instead of the button; but the only
recommendation these can possibly possess in the eyes of any artist, is
their cheapness.

[Illustration: Fig. 19 (hipho_19.gif)]

For a Daguerreotypist permanently located the independent iron
head-rest, B fig. 19, is the most preferable, principally on account of
its solidity.  It is entirely of iron, is supported by a tripod (a) of
the same metal and can be elevated by means of a rod (b) passing
through the body of the tripod, to a height sufficient for a person,
standing, to rest against.

[Illustration: Fig. 20 (hipho_20.gif)]

GALVANIC BATTERY.--This article is used for the purpose of giving to
imperfectly coated plates a thicker covering of silver.  The form of
battery now most universally employed for electrotype, and other
galvanic purposes, is Smee's--Fig. 20.  It consists of a piece of
platinized silver, A, on the top of which is fixed a beam of wood, B,
to prevent contact with the silver.  A binding screw C is soldered on
to the silver plate to connect it with any desired object, by means of
the copper wire, e.  A plate of amalgamated zinc, D, varying with the
fancy of the operator from one half to the entire width of the silver
is placed on each side of the wood.  This is set into a glass vessel,
P,--the extreme ends of the wood resting upon its edge--on which the
acid with which it is charged has no effect.  The jar is charged with
sulphuric acid, (common oil of vitriol) diluted in eight parts its bulk
of water.  The zinc plates of the battery have been amalgamated with
quicksilver, and when the battery is set into the jar of acid there
should be no action percieved upon them when the poles F, G, are not in
contact.  Should any action be percieved, it indicates imperfect
amalgamation; this can be easily remedied by pouring a little mercury
upon them immediately after removing them from the acid, taking care to
get none upon the centre plate A.

Directions for use.--A sheet of silver must be attached to the wire
connected with the centre plate A of the battery, and placed in the
silver solution--prepared as directed below.  The plate to be silvered
is first cleaned with diluted sulphuric acid, and then attached to the
wire, G, proceeding from the zinc plates D, D, and placed in the silver
solution, opposite the silver plate attached to the pole F, and about
half an inch from it.  A slight effervescence will now be percieved
from the battery, and the silver will be deposited upon the
Daguerreotype plate, while at the same time a portion of the silver
plate is dissolved.

To prepare the solution of silver.--Dissolve one ounce of chloride of
silver in a solution of two ounces of cyanide of potassium, previously
dissolved in one quart of water.  The oxide of silver may be used
instead of the chloride.  This solution is put into a tumbler, or other
vessel.

[Illustration: Fig. 21 (hipho_21.gif)]

[Illustration: Fig. 22 (hipho_22.gif)]

This battery with the necessary articles for using it may be obtained
of E. Anthony, 205 Broadway, New York city.

The other articles required by every operator may be simply enumerated,
viz:

Sticking, or sealing paper.

A pair of pliers, or forceps.

Porcelain pans or dishes, for applying the hyposulphite of soda and
washing after the imagine is fixed, something in form like fig. 23.

A support for holding the plate while being washed, like fig. 24.

[Updater's note: Figures 23 and 24 were missing from the image set.]

[Illustration: Fig. 25 (hipho_25.gif)]

BUFF STICKS.--Fig. 25.--These are usually from one to three feet in
length, and about three inches wide--some think two and a half
sufficient.  The underside, which is convex, is covered with a strip of
finely prepared buckskin, or velvet, well padded with cotton or tow.

All the articles enumerated in this chapter may be obtained, of the
very best quality and at the most reasonable rates, of Mr. E. Anthony,
205, Broadway, New York.



CHAP. VI.

THE DAGUERREOTYPE PROCESS.

The process of taking Daguerreotype pictures differs very materially
from all others of the photographic art, inasmuch as the production of
the image is effected upon plates of copper coated with silver.  The
silver employed should be as pure as possible; the thickness of the
plate is of little consequence, provided there be sufficient silver to
bear the cleaning and polishing--is free from copper spots, is
susceptible of a high polish, an exquisitely sensitive coating and a
pleasing tone.  These qualities are possessed to an eminent degree by
the French plates.

Having already enumerated the various processes--and the apparatus
necessary for the manipulation, I will here give a list of the
chemicals to be used, and then proceed to explain them more fully.  The
requisite chemicals are--

  NITRIC ACID,             ROUGE,
  DRY IODINE,              MERCURY,
  DRYING POWDER,           HYPOSULPHITE OF SODA,
  CYANIDE OF POTASSIUM,    CHLORIDE OF GOLD; OR
  ROTTENSTONE,             HYPOSULPHITE OF GOLD.
  TRIPOLI,                 CHLORIDE OF SILVER.
  CHLORIDE OF IODINE,  } their compounds, or other
  BROMINE              } accelerating mixtures.

FIRST OPERATION.--Cleaning and polishing the plate.--For this purpose
the operator will require the--

Plate Blocks,

Plate Vice

Spirit Lamp,

Polishing Buffs,

Nitric Acid, diluted in fifteen times its bulk of water

Galvanic Battery, to galvanize the plate, if it is too imperfect to be
used without, previous cleaning it, as directed in the last chapter.

Rottenstone,

Tripoli, which is too often dispensed with.

Rouge, or lampblack--the first being most preferable.  The English
operators mix the two together.

Prepared cotton Wool, or Canton flannel.  If the first is used, it
should be excluded from the dust, as it is not so easily cleansed as
the latter.

The plate is secured, with its silver side upward, to the block, by the
means described on page 58--having previously turned the edges backward
all around.  The amount of cleaning a plate requires, depends upon the
state it is in.  We will suppose one in the worst condition; dirty,
scratched, and full of mercury spots, all of which imperfections are
more or less to be encountered.  The mercury spots are to be removed by
burning the plate.  To do this hold the plate over the flame of a
spirit lamp, more particularly under the mercury spots, until they,
assume a dull appearance, when the lamp is to be removed, and the plate
allowed to cool, after which it is attached to the block.

Place the block upon the swivle, and hold it firmly with the left hand;
take a small knot or pellet of cotton, or, if you like it better, a
small piece of canton flannel--wet it with a little diluted nitric
acid; then sift some finely prepared rottenstone--Davie's,* if you can
get it--upon it, and rub it over the plate with a continual circular
motion, till all traces of the dirt and scratches are removed; then
wipe off the rottenstone with a clean piece of cotton, adopting, as
before, a slight circular motion, at the same time wiping the edges of
the plate.  Even the back should not be neglected, but throughly
cleansed from any dirt or greasy film it may have received from
handling.

* Sold by E. Anthony.

When this is thoroughly accomplished, mix a portion of your tripoli
with the dilute nitric acid, to the consistence of thick cream.  Then
take a pellet of cotton and well polish the plate with this mixture, in
the same manner as with the rottenstone.  Continue the process till, on
removing the tripoli with a clean pellet, the plate exhibits a clear,
smooth, bright surface, free from all spots, or scratches.  Any remains
of the acid on the plate may be entirely removed By sifting on it a
little Drying powder, and then wiping it carefully off with a fine
camels hair brush, or duster.  The finishing polish is now to be given.

For this purpose the rouge--or a mixture of rouge and lamp-black, in
the proportion of one part of the former to seven of the latter--is
used.  It should be kept either in a muslin bag, or wide mouth bottle,
over which a piece of muslin is tied--in fact, both the rottenstone and
tripoli should be preserved from the dust in the same manner.  With a
little of this powder spread over the buff--described on page 53--the
plate recieves its final polish; the circular motion is changed for a
straight one across the plate, which, if intended for a portrait,
should be buffed the narrow way; but if, for a landscape or view of a
house, the length way of the plate.

The operation of cleaning the plate at first appears difficult and
tedious, and many have been deterred from attempting this interesting
art on that account; but, in reality, it is more simple in practice
than in description, and with a little patience and observation, all
difficulties are easily overcome.  Great care must be taken to keep the
buff free from all extraneous matter, and perfectly dry, and when not
in use it should be wrapped up in tissue paper, or placed in a tight
box.

The plate should be buffed immediately before the sensitive coating is
given; particles of dust are thus effectually removed; the temperature
of the plate is also increased by the friction, and the required tint
more readily obtained.

SECOND OPERATION.--Applying the sensative coating.--The apparatus and
chemicals required, are an

Iodine box--see fig. 14 page 53.

Bromine box--similar to the iodine box but a trifle deeper.

Dry Iodine.

Bromine, or a compound of Bromine and Chloride of Iodine, or other
sensitive mixture.

Most of our best operators use the compound Bromine and Chloride of
Iodine.  In the early days of the Daguerreotype, Iodine alone was used
in preparing the plate, and although it still plays a very important
part, other preparations, called accelerating liquids, quickstuff, &c.,
are used, and the discovery of which has alone ensured the application
of the Daguerreotype successfully to portrait taking--for when first
introduced among us it took from five to ten minutes to produce a
tolerable good view, while now but the fraction of a minute is required
to obtain an accurate likeness.

To iodize the plate perfectly it must be placed over the iodine vapor
immediately after buffing.  Scatter from a sixteenth to the eighth of
an ounce of dry iodine over the bottom of your coating box, and
slightly cover it with cotton wool.  The plate is then dropped into the
frame b, fig. 12, with its silvered surface downward, and thrust under
the lid h.  The bright surface of the plate is soon coated with a film
of iodine of a fine yellow color; it is then removed and placed over
the accelerating solution.  It is not absolutely necessary to perform
this operation in the dark, although a bright light should be avoided.
Not so the next part of the process, viz; giving the plate its extreme
sensitiveness, or coating with the accelerating liquids.  In this great
caution should be used to prevent the slightest ray of light impringing
directly on the plate, and in examining the color reflected light
should always be used.  A convenient method of examining the plate, is
to make a small hole in the partition of the closet in which you coat,
and cover it with a piece of tissue paper; by quickly turning the plate
so that the paper is reflected upon it the color is very distinctly
shown.  Most of our operators are not so particular in this respect as
they should be.

ACCELERATING LIQUID.--Of these there are several kinds, which differ
both in composition and action--some acting very quickly, others giving
a finer tone to the picture although they are not so expeditious in
there operations; or in other words, not so sensitive to the action of
light.  These are adopted by Daguerreotypists according to their tastes
and prejudices.  They are all applied in the same way as the coating of
iodine.  The following are the best.

Bromine water--This solution is much used in France, and, I shall
therefore give its preparation, and the method of using it, in the
words of M. Figeau.  "Put into a bottle of pure water, a large excess
of bromine; shake the mixture well, and before using it, let all the
bromine be taken up.  An ascertained quantity of this saturated water
is then diluted in a given quantity of distilled water, which gives a
solution of bromine that is always identical." M. Figeau recommends one
part of the saturated solution to thirty parts its bulk of water; but
M. Lesebour finds it more manageable if diluted with forty times.  In
case pure distilled, or rain water cannot be procured, a few drops of
nitric acid--say six to the quart--should be added to the common water.

Put into the bromine box a given quantity of this solution, sufficient
to well cover the bottom; the plate, having been iodized to a deep
yellow, is placed over it; the time the plate should be exposed must be
ascertained by making a few trials; it averages from twelve to forty
seconds.  When once ascertained, it is the same for any number of
plates, as the solution, which of course would become weaker and
weaker, is changed after every operation, the same quantity being
always put into the pot.

Chloride of Iodine.--This is prepared by introducing chlorine gass into
a glass vessel containing iodine; the iodine is liquified, and the
above named compound is the result.  Operators need not, however, be at
the trouble and expense of preparing it, as it can be obtained
perfectly pure of Mr. Anthony, 205 Broadway, N. Y., as also all of the
chemicals herein enumerated.  The compound is diluted with distilled
water, and the plate submitted to its action till it is of a rose
color.  Chloride of iodine alone, is seldom if ever used now by
American operators, as it does not sufficiently come up to their
locomotive principle of progression.  The next is also eschewed by the
majority, although many of our best artists use no other, on account of
the very fine tone it gives to pictures.

Bromide of Iodine.--This is a compound of bromine and chloride of
iodine.  In mixing it, much depends upon the strength of the
ingredients; an equal portion of each being generally used.  Perhaps
the best method of preparing it, is to make a solution in alcohol of
half an ounce of chloride of iodine, and add the bromine drop by drop,
until the mixture becomes of a dark red color; then dilute with
distilled water, till it assumes a bright yellow.  Put about half an
ounce of this compound into the pot, and coat over it to a violet
color, change the solution when it becomes too weak to produce the
desired effect.

Another.--Mix half an ounce of bromine with one ounce of chloride of
iodine, add two quarts pure distilled water, shake it well and let it
stand for twelve hours then add twenty-five drops of muriatic acid, and
let it stand another twelve hours, occasionally shaking it up well.
Dilute six parts of this solution in sixteen of water.  Coat over dry
iodine to a deep yellow, then over the sensitive to a deep rose
color--approaching purple--then back, over dry iodine from four to
eight seconds.

Roach's Tripple Compound.--This is one of the very best sensitive
solutions, and is very popular among Daguerreotypists.  To use this,
take one part in weight, say one drachm, of the compound and dilute it
with twelve of water; coat over dry iodine to yellow, then over the
compound to a rosy red.  The effect in the camera is quick, and
produces a picture of a fine white tone.

Gurney's Sensitive.--This is another preparation of bromine, and gives
a fine tone.  To two parts of water add one of the sensitive, and put
just sufficient in the box to cover the bottom, or enable you to coat
in from eight to ten seconds.  Coat over dry iodine to a dark yellow,
and over the quick till you see a good change, then back over the dry
iodine from two to three seconds.

Bromide of Lime, or Dry Sensitive.--This is a compound but recently
introduced, and is becoming somewhat of it favorite, owing principally
to the slight trouble it gives in its preparation, and the tone it
imparts to the picture.  To prepare it, fill your jar about half or
quarter full of dry slacked lime, then drop into it bromine, till it
becomes a bright orange red.  The plate is generally coated over this
compound, after the iodine coating to yellow, to a violet, or plum
color; but it will work well under any circumstances, the color being
of little consequence, if coated from thirty to ninety seconds,
according to its strength.

Mead's Accelerator.--I merely mention this as being in the market, not
knowing any thing in regard to its merits.  The directions given for
its use are as follows: Mix one-third of a bottle with a wine glass
full of water, coat the plate over dry iodine to a dark gold color,
then over the accelerator to a violet, then back over dry iodine, or
chloride of iodine, from three to five seconds.

Chloride of Bromine.--M. Bissou, a French experimentalist, has found
that bromine associated with chlorine, prepared in a similar manner to
chloride of iodine, already described, a solution of bromine being
substituted for the iodine, is a very sensitive solution; by means of
it daguerreotype proofs are obtained in half a second, and, thus very
fugitive subjects are represented, making it the very best compound for
taking children.  So quick is its operation, that even persons or
animals may be taken in the act of walking.

Hungarian Liquid.--This, I believe, has never been used here, or
imported into this country, and the composition of it is not generally
known, even in Europe, where it has taken precedence of all others.  It
acts quickly and with considerable certainty.  It is used by diluting
it with from ten to fifteen times its bulk of water, putting a
sufficient quantity into the jar to cover the bottom.  The plate being
previously iodized to a light yellow, is submitted to this mixture till
it assumes a light rose tint.

Bromine and Fluoric Acid, in combination, are used by some Daguerrean
artists as a sensitive, but any of the above compounds are better;
besides this, the fluoric acid is a dangerous poison, and the quick
made from it will not repay the risk to the health in using it.

As I have before said, great caution should be observed in examining
the color of the plate, even by the feeble light allowed, which, when
attained, must be immediately placed in the holder belonging to the
camera and covered with the dark slide.  You then pass to the

THIRD OPERATION.--Submitting the Plate to the action of Light in the
Camera.--Experience alone must guide the operator as to the time the
plate should be exposed to the influence of the light; this being
dependent on a variety of circumstances, as clearness of the
atmosphere--and here, a reference to the hygrometer will be of
advantage--time of day, object to be taken, and the degree of
sensitiveness imparted to the plate by the quickstuff.  As I have
before said, the artist should be careful to see that the interior of
the camera is clean and free from dust, as the small particles flying
about, or set in motion by the sliding of the holder into the box,
attach themselves to the plate, and cause the little black spots, by
which an otherwise good picture is frequently spoiled.  Care should
also be taken in withdrawing the dark slide, in front of the plate,
from the holder, as the same effect may be produced by a too hasty
movement.  The lens is the last thing to be uncovered, by withdrawing
the cap c. fig. 5., which should not be done until you have placed the
sitter in the most desirable position.  When, according to the judgment
and experience of the operator, the plate has remained long enough to
receive a good impression, the cap is replaced over the lens, and the
dark slide over the plate, which is then removed from the camera.

Daguerreotypists generally mark time by their watches, arriving at the
nearest possible period for producing a good picture by making several
trials.  As a ready method of marking short intervals of time is,
however, a very important consideration, and as any instrument which
will enable an artist to arrive at the exact period, must be an
improvement, and worthy of universal adoption, I will here describe one
invented by Mr. Constable of England, which he calls a

Sand Clock, or Time Keeper.--"It consists of a glass tube, about twelve
inches long, by one in diameter, half filled with fine sand, similar to
that used for the ordinary minute glasses, and, like them, it has a
diaphram, with a small hole in the centre through which the sand runs.
The tube is attached to a board which revolves on a centre pin; on the
side is a graduated scale, divided into half seconds; the tube is also
provided with a moveable index.  This instrument is attached, in a
conspicuous place, to the wall.  The glass tube being revolved on its
centre, the index is set to the number of half seconds required, and
the sand running down, the required time is marked without the
possibility of error.  In practice it will be found to be a far more
convenient instrument for the purpose than either a clock or a seconds
watch, and is applicable both for the camera and mercury box."

If the artist finds it desirable or necessary to take the object to be
copied in its right position, that is reverse the image on the
spectrum, he can do so by attaching a mirror (which may be had of Mr.
Anthony, or Mr. Roach) to the camera tube, at an angle of forty-five
degrees.

If, after taking the plate from the camera, it be examined, no picture
will yet be visible, but this is brought about by the

FOURTH PROCESS.--Bringing out the Picture, or rendering it Visible.--We
now come to the use of the mercury bath, Fig. 11.  To the bath a
thermometer is attached, to indicate the proper degree of beat
required, which should never be raised above 170 deg. Fahrenheit.  The
plate maybe put into one of the frames (see Fig. 11,) over the mercury,
face downwards, and examined from time to time, by simply raising it
with the fingers, or a pair of plyers.  This operation, as well as the
others, should take place in the dark closet.

[Illustration: Fig. 26 (hipho_26.gif)]

[Updater's note: hipho_26.gif and hipho27.gif are both captioned Figure
27.]

Sometimes, to prevent the necessity of raising the plate, an additional
cover or top is made use of.  It consists of a box fitted closely to
the inner rim of the bath, and having an inclined top (a, Fig. 27.) The
top is cut through and fitted with frames for each size of plate, like
those already described, and in the back is a piece of glass (b,)
through which to view the progress of mercurialization, and an
additional piece (c,) on one side, colored yellow, to admit the light.
The outline only of the top is here given, in order to show every
portion of it at one view.

The picture, being fully developed, is now taken out and examined; it
must not, however, be exposed to too strong a light.  If any glaring
defects be perceived, it is better not to proceed with it, but place it
on one side to be re-polished; if, on the contrary, it appears perfect,
you may advance to the

FIFTH OPERATION.--Fixing the Image so that the light can no longer act
upon it.--The following articles are required for this purpose:

Two or three porcelain or glass dishes, in form, something like fig. 24.

A plate support, fig. 25.  Few, I believe, now make use of this,
although it is a very convenient article.

Hyposulphite of Soda,

A pair of Plyers.

In Europe, they also use a drying apparatus, Fig. 27, but this, like
the plate support, is a matter of little consequence, and may be
dispensed with.  I will, however, describe it, for the benefit of those
who may wish to use it.

[Illustration: Fig. 27 (hipho_27.gif)]

[Updater's note: hipho_26.gif and hipho27.gif are both captioned Figure
27.]

A vessel made of copper or brass, tinned inside, and large enough to
take in the largest plate, but not more than half an inch wide, is the
most convenient.  It must be kept perfectly clean.  Hot distilled water
is poured into it, and the temperature kept up by a spirit lamp.

Hyposulphite of Soda.--Having made a solution of hyposulphite of soda,
and well filtered it--the strength is immaterial; about half an ounce
of the salt to a pint of distilled water is sufficient--pour it into
one of the porcelain dishes, put into another plain, and into a third
distilled water.  Immerse the plate with its face downwards into the
hyposulphite, and the whole of the sensitive is removed, and the light
has no farther action upon it; it is then to be removed from the
hyposulphite and plunged into the plain water, or placed upon the
support, fig. 25, and the water poured over it.  It is then washed in a
similar manner with the distilled water and well examined, to see that
not the slightest particle of dust rests on the surface.  The next step
is to dry it.

This may be readily accomplished by holding the plate with your plyers,
and pouring distilled water over it--if it is hot, so much the better.
Apply the spirit lamp to the back, at the corner held by the plyers, at
the same time facilitating the operation with the breath; pass the lamp
gradually downwards, finishing at the extreme corner.  The last drop
may now be removed by a little bibulous paper.  A single drop, even, of
distilled water allowed to dry on any part of the surface, is certain
to leave a stain which no after process can remove.

To illustrate the necessity for having perfectly clean water, and free
from all foreign matter--only to be avoided by using that which is
distilled--in these processes, I will relate a little anecdote.

An operator in this city (New York) frequently made complaint to me,
that his plates were occasionally very bad; coming out all over in
little black and white spots and spoiling many very good pictures,
regretting at the same time that perfect plates were not made, for he
had lost many customers in consequence of these defects.  These
complaints being somewhat periodical, I suggested that the fault might
be in the hyposulphite, or chloride of gold solutions, or particles of
dust floating about in the room, and not in the plate.

A few days after he stated, that his plates having served him again in
the same way, he procured a fresh supply of hyposulphite of soda and
chloride of gold, but after applying them the result was no better.  He
then, by my advice, thoroughly cleaned his wash dishes, bottles and
water pail, made fresh solutions and had no further trouble, becoming
satisfied that the plates suffered an undue share of censure.

SIXTH PROCESS.--Gilding the Picture.--This is an improvement the honor
of which is due to M. Figeau, and may take place either before the
drying process, or at any subsequent period; but it improves the
picture so materially that it should never be neglected.  The articles
necessary for gilding are--

A Pair of Plyers; or a Gilding Stand (see fig. 19) and Chloride of
Gold; or Hyposulphite of Gold.

The latter is imported by Mr. E. Anthony, 205 Broadway, New York, and
is decidedly the best article for the purpose.  One bottle simply
dissolved in a quart of water will make a very strong solution, and
gives a richness to the picture impossible to be obtained from the
chloride of gold.  The process is precisely similar to that described
below for chloride of gold, taking care to cease the moment the bubbles
are well defined over the surface of the plate.  Many Daguerreotypists,
after a superficial trial, discard the hyposulphite of gold as
inferior; but I have no hesitation in asserting that the fault lies
with themselves; for in every case within my knowledge, where its use
has been persisted in until the correct method has been ascertained and
the nature of the gilding has become familiar, it is always preferred.
In illustration of this fact I will relate an anecdote:

A gentleman to whom it had been recommended, purchased a bottle, and
after making one or two trials of it, wrote to his correspondent--"Send
me two bottles of chloride of gold, for I want no more of the
hyposulphite; it is good for nothing." A few weeks after he sent for
three bottles of the condemned article, confessing that he had found
fault unnecessarily; for, that since he had become familiar to its use,
he must acknowledge its superiority, and would use no other gilding.

The Solution of Chloride of Gold is prepared by dissolving in a pint of
distilled water, fifteen grains of chrystalized chloride of gold.  This
solution will be of a yellow tint.  In another pint of distilled water
dissolve fifty-five grains of hyposulphite of soda; pour gradually, in
very small quantities, the gold into the hyposulphite of soda, stirring
the solution at intervals; when finished the mixture should be nearly
colorless.

Place the plate on its stand, or hold it in the plyers, in a perfectly
horizontal position--silver surface upward--having previously slightly
turned up the edges, so that it may hold the solution.  Wet the surface
with alcohol, letting any superfluous quantity drain off.  The alcohol
is of no farther use than to facilitate the flowing of the gold mixture
over the surface.  Now pour on, carefully, as much of the preparation
of gold as will remain on the plate.  The under part of the plate is
then to be heated as uniformly as possible with the spirit lamp; small
bubbles will arise, and the appearance of the portrait or view very
sensibly improved.  The process must not be carried too far, but as
soon as the bubbles disappear the lamp should be removed, and the plate
immersed in distilled water, and dried as before directed.

7th. COLORING THE PICTURE.--I very much doubt the propriety of coloring
the daguerreotypes, as I am of opinion, that they are little, if any,
improved by the operation, at least as it is now generally practised.

There are several things requisite in an artist to enable him to color
a head, or even a landscape effectively, and correctly, and I must say
that very few of these are possessed by our operators as a class.
These requirements are, a talent for drawing--taste--due discrimination
of effect--strict observance of the characteristic points in the
features of the subject--quick perception of the beautiful, and a
knowledge of the art of mixing colors, and blending tints.

The method now pursued, I do not hesitate to say, and have no fears of
being contradicted by those capable of critisizing is on the whole
ruinous to any daguerreotype, and to a perfect one absolutely
disgusting.  The day may come when accurate coloring may be obtained in
the camera.  Until that day, if we cannot lead taste into the right
channel, we will endeavor to give such instructions that
Daguerreotypists may proceed with this part of his work with a better
understanding of the principles involved.  For this purpose I have
prepared a short chapter on the art of coloring, which may be found in
the latter part of this volume.

To Preserve Daguerreotypes they must be well sealed and secured in a
case, or frame.  These, of course, are selected according to the taste
of the customer, the principal requisite being good glass.  Most
Daguerreotypists prefer the white French plate glass--and many think,
very erroneously, that none is good unless it is thick--but the great
desideratum is clearness and freedom from blisters; even glass a little
tinged with green or yellow is to be preferred to the French plate when
cloudy or blistered and there is very little of it comes to this market
that is not so.  It is to be hoped that some of our glass factories
will