The Project Gutenberg eBook of Violists
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

*** This is a COPYRIGHTED Project Gutenberg eBook. Details Below. ***
***     Please follow the copyright guidelines in this file.      ***


Title: Violists

Author: Richard McGowan


        
Release date: March 1, 1994 [eBook #112]
                Most recently updated: October 29, 2024

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/112

Credits: HTML version by Al Haines


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK VIOLISTS ***

                 Violists, by Richard McGowan


                (C)1994 Richard McGowan

                        San Jose, California

                        January 22, 1994




TEXTUAL NOTE:  In this edition words of French origin in the text are
spelled without their customary accent marks, due to the limitations of
the ASCII medium.  It is the author's intent that they be spelled with
accents whenever possible (e.g., gateau, tête-à-tête).

=====================================================================

                   PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION

"Violists" began to germinate early in December last, as Christmas
approached.  I originally intended that it be ready before the new
year, but alas, it came in behind schedule, and was not completed until
January.  It is still winter in some places--the right season for such
morsels--so rather than let the work languish upon the shelf for
another year...

Somewhere out there on The Net, I hope there is a solitary reader
settled comfortably in a warm study with a nice cup of tea.  Perhaps
the lights are out, and the amber glow of the terminal spreads faint
warmth through the room; overstuffed bookshelves loom behind in the
darkness.  If the evening air is crisp and a soft snow is falling
outside the window, so much the better--a view of icicles would be a
magical touch.

                     -- Richard McGowan
                        San Jose, California
                        January 22, 1994


=====================================================================


                             VIOLISTS

                        by Richard McGowan
                            (Opus 22)

                    1. Gretchen in the Library
                    2. The Hungarian Lightbulb
                    3. Christmas Concert


=====================================================================



                     GRETCHEN IN THE LIBRARY



In winter the interior of the university library was hardly warmer than
the outside, and it was terribly drafty.  The sole difference between
the interior and exterior, Gretchen often remarked to herself, was that
the latter received an occasional snow.  The library at least was dry.
On most days in the unfrequented areas--the closed stacks on the second
and third floors--one could see one's breath in the middle of the
afternoon.  Gretchen thought it hardly the sort of climate she would
have chosen for her own books.  But the cost of heating such an
enormous building--well, she decided she could hardly imagine so
extravagant a sum.  On the coldest days, she often wore two petticoats.
She found the best method of staying warm, though, was to bustle as
quickly as she could.  Primarily, she worked in the stacks, extracting
books for the library's patrons and reshelving books that had
returned--and keeping the shelves in good order.

Gretchen's twenty-ninth birthday had arrived--quite too quickly--the
day before, and she bustled with an excess of alacrity to relieve her
mind from the brooding that had occupied her for several days.  She had
spent the evening alone, though she knew it did her no good to seek
solitude.  To accept being past her prime of life would be simpler
perhaps, and productive of less anguish, than fretting over what could
not be changed.  She was nearly thirty, though--and she knew what lay
in store for her a few years hence.  She had only to look at the
assistant reference librarian, Miss Sadie, to see how she herself would
be in but a few more years.  The thought nearly made her shudder, and
if she allowed herself to think too deeply upon the matter, might have
brought her to tears.  Thankfully, Gretchen told herself, she could
grow old among the books, where at least she had the company of great
minds--or their legacy--rather than spend a life straining in a
factory--or under the yoke of an old-fashioned man.

She had been estranged from her family for six years and rarely given
them serious thought since fleeing Connecticut.  A simple enough row it
had been to start--what should she do now that she had finished
university?  Of course her father recommended marriage and settling
into the domestic life--a pretty girl like her.  Him and his antiquated
ideals--a pretty girl in the kitchen, indeed!  At twenty-three she had
finally come to her senses and refused to marry the young man to whom
she had been betrothed, no matter how well matched her father thought
they were.

Her mother had frequently confided to Gretchen her views on the varied
pleasures--and trials--inherent in marriage, admitting that as the
years passed she found the pleasures perhaps not worth the other
hardships--the outward subjugation of her own feelings and the constant
deference she was required to display within the confines of that
marriage, as if she had no independent mind.  Gretchen had long since
determined that would not be her fate.  She had come to believe that no
suitable man could be found, yet she remained unsatisfied.  The only
true regret she had about casting off her family ties was that she had
disappointed her mother.  It was her mother who had worked so hard,
really, to see that Gretchen had an education; her father only
begrudgingly went along for the sake of domestic tranquility when all
efforts to dissuade her had failed.

At university Gretchen had imbibed the rarefied intellectual atmosphere
with increasing eagerness and found herself drawn irresistibly up the
slopes of Parnassus.  She had always intended to work after completing
university--and work she did, though she had difficulty making due with
what employment she could find.  Even a superlative education, she had
learned in six years, did not buy one certain rights or reasonable
wages.  She hoped that she would yet see the flowering of an age that
she could call an enlightened one.  She might have been bitter had she
higher material aspirations, but she was content with little in the way
of physical comforts.  Why the privilege of spending nearly all her
days in the library would have been worth almost any sacrifice--what
need had she of wages!

It was lamentable, she decided, that she should have to forgo marital
companionship if she were to retain her individuality--for the price of
her freedom was a monumental sort of loneliness that only the severest
mental discipline could overcome.  She had seen so many of her school
friends smothered in the clutches of bad marriages, worn out beneath
their husbands' heels--almost like doormats.  To be truthful there were
those who seemed to prosper in the state of matrimony, but she thought
them few.  Yet, she still had an abiding fear that she would grow old
alone--and soon enough become as obdurate as Miss Sadie--a pitiable
spinster with none of the finer sensibilities left to her.  Was there
no man, Gretchen wondered, with whom she could share her life and
interests--a man with progressive ideas?  Not a man that she, like a
tiny moon, would orbit eternally, but one with whom she could find a
state of mutual orbit.  Well, she thought, something of that nature
anyway.  Her knowledge of astronomy was not up to the task of finding a
better analogy, and she resolved to remedy that as soon as she was
able.  She added another volume--'something concerning the heavens' she
called it--to the list of books she thought she really must read.

Gretchen bustled, thinking these thoughts, dreading her next birthday.
She blew softly on a wisp of auburn hair that had somehow escaped from
the green ribbon with which she tied it back that morning.  Several
strands had somehow got into her mouth but her arms were too full of
books--heavy tomes, all--to pull them away with her fingers.  She was
on the verge of setting down the burden and tending to her hair for a
moment when, as she turned a corner into the next row, a shadow fell
across the topmost book in her arms.  She glanced up in surprise.  A
man stood mere inches in front of her--and looked up to find her
bearing down upon him with a full head of steam--even as he stepped
toward her.

"Oh!" she cried, attempting to stop herself.  The books slid
irretrievably from her grasp, their pages flying open with a flutter.

The man's arms shot out.  "The books!" came his cry of astonishment as
they tumbled about him.  He tried to catch a few, left and then right,
but alas they fell--all but one--to the floor with a dull clatter.

"Oh dear," Gretchen whispered, looking down.  She feared she had bent a
few pages, and putting a hand to her mouth knelt immediately to gather
them all.  "I'm terribly sorry, sir," she continued in a rush as she
piled books one after the other.  "My clumsiness..."

"Think nothing of it, Miss," the man replied lightly.  "It's my fault.
I do hope _you_ were not harmed by _my_ clumsiness..." He knelt then,
and began to place books upon her stack, starting with the volume he
had saved from falling.  The lucky book was one of the late Mr.
Darwin's, and when he glanced momentarily at the spine she blushed
deeply despite herself--for she had that day finished reading it, and
was returning it to its rightful place.  She knew that he had seen her
cheeks color.

Gretchen looked around, and seeing there were no more stray books,
prepared to pick up the stack again.  She stood up to catch her breath
and smooth her wool skirt, arching back her shoulders.  Looking down at
the man, she finally remembered to blow the wisp of hair from her face.
He was looking up at her and positively beaming--clean-shaven and light
complected, she noted--but the smile faded almost instantly to a faint
curling about the corners of his lips.

"Please accept my apologies," he stated, still kneeling upon the floor.
"I will have to be more careful."  His hair was dishevelled--great
curly locks of jet black, and he laughed nervously as he brushed it
from his eyes.  He peered at her with eyes so black, yet so kindly,
that Gretchen found herself blushing again and put a hand to her chest.
The man stopped for a moment to adjust his shirt and coat, then stood
slowly, and with the hint of a bow, swept past her and away.
Unaccountably, she felt suddenly light-headed and sat down upon the
floor by her books.  His eyes! she exclaimed to herself with an outrush
of breath.  She felt that in an instant they had devoured her; had
known all about her.  She could not recall ever having seen such lively
and intelligent eyes--so deep and black they seemed like windows
opening onto a starlit sky.  And his hand! when he placed the last book
upon the stack--the nails so trim.  His hands were almost feminine, and
finely wrought.  Gretchen gradually composed herself, then picked up
her books and continued about her work.

      *      *      *      *      *

Several times thereafter in the course of a fortnight Gretchen saw the
same young man about the library, and they developed an acquaintance
that began and ended with nodding pleasantly and wishing each other
"good day".  She thought him quite the most interesting patron she had
seen in the library for... she knew not how long--perhaps never in the
two years she had been there.  He was flamboyant, certainly, Gretchen
decided, but he had not that rakishness or arrogance that so often
accompanies one who is as smart a dresser as he seemed.  Her thoughts
chanced to light upon him sometimes, and within the fortnight, she
decided he must be attached to the university.  Perhaps a
professor--well certainly not a full professor, he was far too young
and had not grown into that masculine stuffiness that comes with long
tenure--and his physique was trim.  No, she decided, he was probably a
fresh young assistant to an elder professor.

"Gretchen, dear."  Miss Sadie's voice crackled behind her in a very
strange manner and Gretchen looked around.  "I do fear I'm catching
some contagion, dear," Miss Sadie continued in a whisper, "can you
possibly mind the desk until closing?"

Gretchen hesitated for a moment.  She had worked long enough in the
library to feel at ease, and with classes already in recess for the
Christmas holidays, there were few patrons.  "Of course, Miss Sadie,"
she answered.  "I do hope you're feeling better tomorrow."

"If not, I shan't be in," Miss Sadie replied in a very weak tone.
"I'll--I'll try to send word."

"I'll see to everything, Miss Sadie--just take care of yourself." She
paused.  "And I'll inform Mr. Johnson--it's no trouble at all." With a
smile and a pitying wag of her head, she added, "Take good care of
yourself."

Miss Sadie thanked her, and took her leave.  Gretchen was alone, at
last, if only for an evening, as temporary queen of the reference desk.
Well, it was about time she was asked to do something besides fetch
books, she thought airily, and took a seat at Miss Sadie's desk.  Miss
Sadie was not very neat for a librarian, she thought, wiping a finger
across the desk, so she began to tidy a few things up.  She put down a
fresh blotter and arranged the papers in a more orderly manner, then
opened a drawer in search of a cloth.  Really, Miss Sadie is the
epitome of disorganization, she muttered, seeing the jumble.  It's a
wonder that a woman like her can retain such a position.

Bing-bing!  Gretchen looked up suddenly when the bell upon the front
counter sounded.  Standing there with his hand poised above the bell
was the young man.

"May I be of assistance?"  Gretchen asked, in her most librarian-like
tone.

The young man smiled.  "I sincerely hope you can.  I wonder if you
might be able to help me find this book?"  He held out a small slip of
paper between two fingers.  "It doesn't appear to be in the open
stacks."

Gretchen glided to the desk and took the slip of paper from him.  A
glance at the number was sufficient.  "You're correct," she told him,
handing the paper back.  "It's in one of the special collections."

"I wonder, then, Miss..."  He paused, drawing out the word into a
silence, until Gretchen felt obliged to fill the audible gap.

"Haviland," she offered in a whisper.

"Miss Haviland.  Could you help me locate it?"  He smiled with the
slightly curling lips he always wore.  Not condescending, she
decided--perhaps amused, or even flirtatious.

Gretchen stood flustered for a moment.  Patrons were not allowed into
the special collections--they were under lock and key.  Should she
leave the reference desk unattended while she fetched it for him? In
the interim, what if another patron had pressing business?  A
preposterous quandary, Gretchen then told herself.  "Of course,
Professor," she replied crisply.  "Let me bring the key."

The young man laughed then, with a toss of his head so that his black
curls flopped into his eyes.  He suddenly sighed, with an exaggerated
look of defeat, brushing back his hair.  "Do I appear so like a
professor, Miss Haviland?  How did you know?"

It was Gretchen's turn to be amused, and she smiled as she went to Miss
Sadie's desk drawer to bring the key.  "You have not the air of a
student, Professor..."  she drew out the word in a manner imitative of
his previous query, until he had to break into a wondrous smile.

"Bridwell!" he exclaimed, and rapped four fingernails once upon the
desk.  "Employed only this year--in the English department."

"Professor Bridwell," she continued, imparting a certain air of
coquetry to her words, "your dress is frankly too punctilious for a
student; and if I might be so tactless, you seem... more evolved, shall
we say."

Having drawn out the key, she beckoned him to follow.  They ascended
the back staircase--likewise taboo for patrons.  All the while Gretchen
thought how to exonerate herself should she be caught by one of her
superiors while leading a patron--alone--into the inner sanctum.  She
decided the best approach would be to plead ignorance--"Oh," she could
say, "I had no idea that professors were considered ordinary patrons."
Would that be sufficient excuse?

The book was easy to find, and Gretchen put herself to no particular
difficulty--but nevertheless, Professor Bridwell's thanks were profuse.
He consulted the book--which could not leave the library--for an hour
or more.  On departing he returned the book to the counter.  He
inclined his head, with the now-familiar flop of his curly hair, and
said, "I do hope to have the pleasure again, Miss Haviland."

Gretchen watched from Miss Sadie's desk as he departed through the
foyer and down the steps leading out.  She closed her eyes for a moment
and sat quietly after he had left--simply savoring the moment.  A faint
scent lingered behind him:  a distinctive cologne that left quite a
favorable impression on her.

      *      *      *      *      *

Gretchen attended a short afternoon concert on campus.  It was the last
student recital of the season, and she had heard tell of the program:
the afternoon was to open with mazurkas by Chopin and a selection of
those divine "Transcendental Etudes" by Liszt--she could not stay away.
Chopin was an aperitif, followed by a few mildly diverting piano works
by students.  Then, she sat breathless and transported--utterly
transported, halfway to tears upon a bed of clouds--through the etudes
of Liszt.  In particular she had never heard the "Harmonies du Soir"
more beautifully rendered.

After an intermission, which she spent simply sitting quietly,
pondering the exquisite delicacies of Liszt's piano writing, the second
part of the concert opened with Vivaldi's "The Four Seasons", performed
by an intimate ensemble rather than with the full complement of
strings.  The performers were students, to be sure, but she found it
delightful nonetheless.  When the "Autumn" season opened, she even felt
a sudden chill in the air--the performance was so wonderfully
effective--and she pulled her shawl more tightly around her shoulders.
She chanced then to look across the audience, and thought that several
rows down, in front of her, she saw Professor Bridwell.  She had no
idea he liked concerts; in fact, she realized that she knew nothing
whatever about him.  She was positive it was the professor--even from
the back, there was no mistaking his curly hair.  At once she realized
that he rather resembled portraits of Hector Berlioz.  He sat upright,
almost leaning forward in a posture that seemed ready to rise in an
instant.  She fancied that could she but see his handsome face, his
eyes would be closed, as he was carried away by the music, blown upon
Vivaldi's autumn wind.  Why she was looking at the audience rather than
at the orchestra she really did not know--she forced her gaze away from
the professor's back and tried to concentrate again upon the music.
But her effort was unsuccessful.

When the concert was ended, Gretchen fairly ran to the exit, and stood
there at the door, looking back across the auditorium.  Yes, it was he,
she saw finally.  He was coming up the aisle and she glimpsed his face
among the swarm of bodies.  He appeared to be alone; he spoke to
nobody.  She stepped out of the way and kept looking across the
audience, as if seeking someone else.  He soon arrived, and when he
walked past, she turned and looked at him, as if suddenly noticing him
for the first time.

His smile was as delightful as always.  "Good evening, Miss Haviland,"
he said, with a tone of warmth.

"Good evening, Professor."  Gretchen thought that he slowed for a
second or two, but she felt acutely embarrassed to be observing him too
closely, and looked away toward the crowd again.  He continued walking.

When the professor had passed, Gretchen let out her breath slowly.
Into the thick of the crowd she plunged, and went out through the
lobby.  Evening had come on and it was dark outside.  Vast hordes were
dispersing across the plaza, pouring from the auditorium.  As she
stepped into the bitterly chill air and started down the stairs, a
voice hailed her from behind.

"Are you alone, then, Miss Haviland?"

Gretchen whirled around at the sound of the professor's voice, in time
to see him laugh briefly.  He was standing just outside the doors,
facing outward, his greatcoat pulled tightly around himself.

Gretchen went to stand on the step below.  "Actually, yes," she
replied, looking up.  "I am alone.  I came by myself on a whim."

"It's quite chilly this evening," he said, stepping down once.  They
started down the stairs beside each other.  "Would you fancy a cup of
coffee, by chance, before making your way home?"

Gretchen smiled.  He certainly had a forward manner; but she found it
refreshing, and--after all, she had really been seeking him, had she
not?  "Why, that sounds like a delightful diversion, Professor.  I
believe I shall."

With that, they set off together across the plaza.  Gretchen started
immediately upon a likely topic of conversation:  the concert they had
just attended.  It was instantly evident that Professor Bridwell had
found the Liszt etudes as breathtaking as she had.  And during the
Vivaldi, as well, he agreed that he had felt a sudden chill at
precisely the same time as she.

"The ensemble did well," she concluded.  "I suppose that is the way
Vivaldi would have heard the work too--none of these large, modern
orchestras quite out of proportion to the delicacy of the music."

"The modern orchestra," stated the professor, "is well enough suited
for modern works, but really, the intimacy required for performing
earlier works--as Vivaldi for instance--is really lost in the great
crowd of strings."

"Agreed."

Presently they came to the campus gates and found their way to a small
café.  Seated at a tiny marble table, they had a delightful
tête-à-tête, and found much to agree upon regarding both the
performance, and the subject of music in general.  Though he had not
quite her madness for Liszt, he agreed with Gretchen's assessment of
the "Transcendental Etudes"--divinely inspired, and, like much of
Liszt's work, nearly beyond the reach of mortals.

Gretchen was on her second coffee and feeling rather giddy.  She could
hardly hold her cup steady, and she finally set it down with a laugh.

"Do you play an instrument, Professor?" she asked, pushing her cup away
with one hand.

"Well, I would not so much call it playing the instrument," he
answered, "as playing _at_ the instrument."

"I see," she laughed.  "Rather the way I play _at_ the viola--though I
daresay you speak of Liszt's writing as if you have some experience
with it."

The professor seemed rather at a loss for an instant.  He glanced away
over Gretchen's shoulder, but recalled himself quickly and lifted his
cup to his lips, meeting her eyes again.  "I do admit I have _tried_."
He set his cup down while reaching into his vest pocket, as if
searching for something.  "But really," he continued, "I haven't the
technique.  How about yourself, Miss Haviland?  I take it you do rather
well yourself, upon the viola."

Gretchen blushed, realizing that she must have sounded boastful just
then.  The professor seemed not to have taken it in stride--she
realized that this must have accounted for his momentary loss for
words.  "Well," she said then, settling herself forward upon her chair.
"At one time--when I was quite young, you understand--I fancied I would
perform upon the instrument.  But..."

"Ah."  Professor Bridwell smiled.  "Then, other interests swept you
away, no doubt.  But still you play?"  He had pulled a silver cigarette
case from his vest pocket, and he turned it over in his fingers.

"Oh, indeed."  Gretchen sighed deeply.  "I suppose, with all modesty
set aside, I was adequate on the instrument--but adequacy in a
performer is hardly to be tolerated..."  Before he could reply, she
rushed onward, feeling her face flush.  "I certainly do not practice
with any regularity of late!"

Professor Bridwell laughed.  "I daresay--at our time of life--leisure
hours seem so unobtainable..."  He looked at his cigarette case,
polishing it with a thumb.  Seeming to think better of smoking just
then, however, he returned the case to his vest pocket.

Gretchen's smile was thin.  She inclined her head, acknowledging the
truth of what he said--they were indeed probably of an age.  Certainly,
she thought he could be no more than thirty-three or thereabouts.
"Then, too, music, while an engaging diversion, and the source of much
happiness, is better shared, wouldn't you say Professor?"  He nodded
slightly, and Gretchen clarified her statement.  "That is to
say--practicing is all very well, but...the joy of music is in sharing
it with one's friends--musical soirées and evenings in the parlor with
a roaring fire.  Old friends gathered around the piano--and
champagne!--"

Professor Bridwell warmed to her words, and rubbed his hands together
as if before the very fire she had mentioned.  "You have hit it
precisely," he replied with enthusiasm.  "Why--it's no wonder that
living, as I do, alone in a house that I fear is far too large for..."

Gretchen thought she detected the professor falter just then, and there
was the slightest of pauses in his speech.

"... For myself alone, you see," he finished.  He laughed at himself,
tossing the black mop of hair to one side.  "But I needed some place
instantly when I arrived here.  I will probably find smaller digs in a
year or so, when I've come to know the city more intimately."

"Indeed," Gretchen answered, returning his smile.  "I quite understand
how one needs permanent lodgings--the more quickly one can find them in
a strange city, why, the quicker one is able to settle into life, get
one's bearings in a foreign port."

"So true," he replied with a firm nod.

A few moments later, a juncture seemed to have been reached in their
conversation.  Their coffees were at an end, and neither of them had
touched their cups for what seemed ages, so engaged had they become in
their conversation.

"But now," Professor Bridwell exclaimed, with a glance to his pocket
watch, "I should not be keeping you away from your supper or--or your
other duties any longer.  Please allow me to escort you home, Miss
Haviland--or where you may be going."

"Thank you, Professor--but really there is no need," she declared.  She
thought that sounded too firm, and she smiled easily, to show that she
meant it only literally, not as a rebuff.  "My rooms are close by, and
the evening air will do me good, you see.  It shan't take me more than
ten minutes at a brisk pace."

"Yes," he agreed.  "I believe I shall walk myself.  The air is good for
the circulation, as long as one's pace is brisk."

Gretchen rose, and took a curtsey.  The Professor held her coat and
stood attentively while she donned her gloves.  "I do thank you most
kindly for the enchanting evening, Professor Bridwell.  It--it has been
marvelous."

"Likewise, Miss Haviland.  I sincerely hope we shall have the pleasure
again soon."

With a few more words of parting, Gretchen stepped into the street,
followed by Professor Bridwell, and they went their separate ways.  She
fancied that he stood in the street and gazed at her until she turned
the next corner, but she dared not glance back.  The evening was
extremely cold, though not overcast, and her wool coat, even with a
shawl wrapped beneath, did not keep the chill from seeping into her
bones.  She rarely wore hats, but that evening she wished she had
one--one of those large fur hats so favored in Russia, she
thought--that would be most appropriate, since she could pull it down
around her ears.  By the time she arrived at her rooming house a few
minutes later, she was shivering.  She undressed and went straight to
bed beneath layers of feather comforters with a hot water bottle
pressed against her chest.  She had no appetite for supper, and
resolved to arise early and eat a hearty breakfast to compensate.

Sleep was elusive in the extreme, but Gretchen found herself strangely
delighted that she could not sleep, for she had the leisure to think
over in detail all that had happened that day.  And especially, she had
time to ponder her interlude with Professor Bridwell.  He was a most
intriguing man.  He was a professor of English Literature--well, that
could mean almost anything, she supposed--yet he did not have that
_way_ about him.  Nearly every professor of English she had ever
met--and a good many students of literature as well--were continually
spouting clever quotes gleaned from the works of obscure authors,
living and dead--they were not particular about that.  It often seemed
to her that the more obscure the quotation, the more it was admired
amongst their cronies.  She had always found such practices revolting.
But Professor Bridwell was not at all like that.  Why, the entire
evening--and it had been two hours in fact that they had sat over cups
lukewarm coffee--he had never quoted an author, famous or otherwise.
Yet, his choice of words, his demeanor, the hint of some foreign
influence in his accent--the way he talked of Liszt--all pointed to an
intimacy with the most literate form of the English language.  Through
clear thoughts and meticulous expression--rather than through
haphazardly quoting other men--he exuded what she believed was a real
professorial air, built upon a solid foundation without pretense.  She
found him refreshingly attractive, both for his own sake and as a
change from the pompous professors she encountered so often in the
library.  As she drifted into sleep, the hot water bottle pressed
against herself, she hoped she would have the opportunity for another
such conversation with Professor Bridwell.

      *      *      *      *      *

Gretchen's cart of books was extraordinarily loaded.  Rather than push
it slowly between the stacks as she reshelved books, she stopped the
cart at the end of each row and carried a few books at a time to their
proper places.  The library was more quiet than usual, and despite the
overwhelming number of books she had to replace that day she worked
rather slowly.  Lost in thought, she hummed to herself, not so loudly
that any patron who happened to be about could hear, but loud enough
for her own amusement.  She had just returned to the cart and pushed it
to the next row.  She lifted another armful of books, choosing those
whose home was in that particular row, and turned to walk slowly,
watching the numbers.  She glanced at each book when she shelved it,
lamenting that she had too little time that day--there could be no
stolen moments of reading, even briefly.  She stood on her toes to
reach an upper shelf and stopped humming for a moment.  The sound of a
footfall reached her at that instant, and she gave the book a quick
shove.

"Good day, Miss Haviland."

Gretchen looked around to see a fine pair of wool trousers, as she
returned her weight fully to her feet.  Following upward with her eyes,
she felt a pleasant blush. "Professor Bridwell, you startled me!" she
exclaimed.

"Careful," he returned, reaching his hand above her head.  Gretchen
looked up to see that he pushed the book further onto the shelf; she
had left it precariously tottering on the edge.  "You almost lost one,
Miss Haviland."

"Oh dear," she laughed, and grasped the rest of the books more securely
to her chest.  She continued to walk easily down the row, with her wool
skirt swinging about her ankles.  "Is there a book I can help you
find?" she asked, whirling toward him like a schoolgirl.

"Actually," the professor said, nervously drawing out the word.  "I've
not come in a--a professional capacity at all today."

"Oh?"  Gretchen turned to look at him, but kept walking.  With her free
hand, she extracted a strand of hair from her mouth.

"The other evening--at coffee," he said, taking up the pace beside her.
"Well, really, I found the conversation most delightful and..."

"Yes?"  Gretchen stopped, then knelt to shelve another book, lower down.

"And I was wondering," he continued rather quickly, as if he dare not
speak of it, "whether you might consent to dine with me this evening."

Gretchen stood up, rather slowly.  "I--well..."

"Yes," the professor stammered, "of course--such short notice.  I
understand.  It's hardly proper, and I'm sure you're quite busy.
Perhaps another time."  He stepped backward as if to take his leave.

"Not at all," Gretchen said with a faint smile.  She clutched the heavy
books more tightly in her arms.  "I should be delighted, really."  She
caught his eye then, and saw it twinkle.  The sight of his smile could
not but make her return it fully.  "The other evening, it did seem
there was ever so much more to say."  She continued down the row, with
Professor Bridwell beside her.

"Is that an acceptance?"

She laughed and stopped to face him squarely, as if astonished.  "Why,
I believe it is, Professor."  She blinked her eyes.  The sudden blush
in his cheeks was profound, and she composed herself to keep from
laughing.

"Would six o'clock be too late?  Or too early?"

"Neither, Professor."  Gretchen thought he looked as if he had been
handed a Christmas goose.  "I'll meet you at the main entrance."

"Stupendous!  I'll..."  He still sounded incredulous, and seemed near
to bursting.  He pushed his black locks from his eye, and twisted a
lock on one finger.  "I'll meet you at six then?"

They took their leaves of each other, and Gretchen thought she heard a
faint whistling in the main stairwell as the sound of his boots on the
stone steps receded.  She flew to her cart immediately the sound died
away in the distance.  Her unflagging concentration would be required
if she were to be finished by six--she had seven more cartloads of
books, and less than five hours in which to reshelve them all.  She did
not stop or rest until five forty-five, when she bid Miss Sadie good
evening, and made her way to the main entrance.  She stood inside the
great oak doors, under stone arches where she could see the professor
through the glass when he approached.  With a few moments to ponder and
catch her breath while she waited, a sudden flutter filled her bosom.
Good Lord, she thought to herself--it's a wonder he did not think me
scandalously forward.  She felt a faint tingling in her cheeks as if
she had begun to color.  What sort of woman would join a stranger for
dinner with five hours notice?  Part of her dared not even answer her
own question, but another part of her replied that he was not a perfect
stranger by any means--she had met him any number of times--and had
joined him for coffee with no notice at all.  It was hardly the time to
start worrying about propriety.  She pulled the ribbon from her hair
and brushed it before retying the ribbon carefully and flinging her
hair behind her back.  The least I can do, she thought, is to make
myself halfway presentable, though it's a pity I haven't time to change
my coat.  A hat might have been welcome for its warmth--the evening was
sure to be cold--and for fashion as well.  But then what is the use of
seeming fashionable, she thought, if fashionable I am not?

With his arms wrapped closely around him and his ungloved hands tucked
beneath his arms, Professor Bridwell trotted up the stairs.  Upon
seeing him, Gretchen pushed open the doors and stepped outside.

"Why it's cooler than I had thought," she remarked.

The professor's smile fairly warmed her heart.  "Let's hurry along
then," he said between chattering teeth, "I know just the place this
evening.  They'll even have a fire, and if we're quick about it, we
might find a table close enough to feel its warmth."

Side by side, they walked out through the plaza.  The clouds had
descended, muffling the sounds of the city beyond.  They continued
through the campus gates into the nearby streets.  The neighborhood was
uncrowded, since so many students had left for their holidays, and
though there were a few groups of people walking to and fro, dressed
warmly against the weather, only the occasional carriage rattled by.
Professor Bridwell led the way into a side street, where they were
greeted by a brightly lit café.

"I had no idea...," Gretchen began.

"Of a French café so near campus?" the professor finished for her.
"It's quite new."  He pulled open the door and the sounds of bustling
crowds and gay voices greeted them.  "I say," he continued, "the place
appears to have been discovered." Gretchen followed him in while he
held the door, and stood by removing her gloves while he conferred with
the head waiter.  She glanced up as she folded her gloves in time to
see the man wisk a bill into his apron pocket.

"Follow me, monsieur."

The professor took Gretchen's arm and led her along.  Their table was
in the back and, as Professor Bridwell had hoped, it was close by an
open brick fireplace filled with a roaring blaze of crackling oak logs.
She sat in silent attendance while their waiter recited, in heavily
accented English, a seemingly unending speech upon the specialities of
the house.

Gretchen lost the particulars mid-way, and her eyes strayed beyond him
to the fire.  "I'm quite overwhelmed," she exclaimed when he had
finished and stood poised before them.  "Please--do what you think
best, Professor."

Professor Bridwell surprised her then, by leaning back with the casual
air of one who knows what he is about, and held forth in what seemed,
to Gretchen's ear, flawless French.

"Bravo, Professor," she chimed when he had finished.  "Your French is
beautiful."

The professor seemed somewhat embarrassed then, and smoothly turned the
conversation to the decor.  The room was hardly what Gretchen should
have expected of a French café--it was done in stark white, with high
rafters of carved wood, but upon the walls hung gorgeously worked
Persian carpets which served to bring the ceiling down and lend
intimacy to the room; and to muffle the sound of so many conversing
guests.  Their entrees arrived in due course--a delightful poached
white fish in delicate sauce, which they ate practically in silence,
but for the occasional comment upon the food.  He asked after her
health, and heard the small-talk of the day, then listened with
interest to an abridged account of her life, interjecting only
occasional questions to clarify certain points.  She stopped short of
revealing the estrangement of her family, but dwelt upon her years at
university.

Gretchen at length noticed the emptiness of her plate and declared that
the fish positively melted in one's mouth.  Professor Bridwell replied
that he would send compliments to the chef.  His smile grew gradually
as he said this, with a hint of something further he wished to add, but
he stopped.

"Was there something else?" she asked, setting her silver carefully
atop her empty plate.

"No, nothing," he laughed, putting down his own silver.

Presently, their plates were cleared away and the professor ordered a
liqueur with coffee.  Gretchen declined a liqueur, having drunk enough
wine already to raise her color slightly--she settled for coffee and a
small gateau.

"You mentioned that you play the viola," he said, taking up his liqueur
with one hand.  "Have you been playing long?"

"Since I was sixteen," she replied, stirring cream into her coffee.  "I
began with the violin as a child--I really can't recall at what age.
When I was sixteen I went away for a summer, and..." she stopped to
look at him for an instant, tapping upon her gateau with her fork.
"Well, I met a young man who played the viola, and I was quite--quite
taken with his instrument.  It seemed to suit me, really."

"I would say it does," the professor agreed.  "Unusual, especially for
a woman--mildly exotic even...and intriguing..."

They continued conversing about the viola and the piano, telling each
other about their favorite pieces, comparing composers.  Gretchen had
never played the piano seriously herself--she found it frustrating and
was amazed that anyone could master such an instrument.

"It requires such independence of the hands," she said.  "I've tried,
but I could never play anything worth mentioning.  Oh, the organ is
another one that I simply cannot fathom.  Beautiful to hear, it's quite
comical to watch--and seems so awkward to play."

"Neither is really any more complicated than the viola, I should
think," the professor replied.  He had been twirling his glass for some
time, but he stopped and removed his hand from the table.  "Think of
the dexterity required to control your bow, and the simultaneous
imparting of vibrato while retaining correct intonation.  It's quite as
remarkable."

"I see what you mean, certainly.  It all seems easy with long practice."

"Do you sing alto as well?"

She laughed.  "Very poor alto, Professor."

"But alto nonetheless.  I was certain you would sing alto." He sipped
his liqueur again and twirled the glass slowly.  "What about opera?  I
despise Wagner myself."

"Really?" Gretchen replied, reaching for her coffee.  "I can't say I
truly enjoy Wagner's work, the little I have heard.  But Verdi--is
luscious."

"Yes, Verdi.  I quite agree with your assessment.  And Mozart, of
course, is beyond reproach."

"Positively.  But I generally prefer the intimacy of lieder myself."

"German?"

She laughed and pointed her fork at him.  "Not only German--chansons as
well."

"I'm relieved to hear it."  Professor Bridwell then put one hand into
his pocket, and withdrew his silver cigarette case.  "Would you mind,
Miss Haviland, if I smoke?"

"Of course not," she replied.

"Some ladies find it offensive," he said, opening the case slowly, "but
I find it the perfect finish to a delightful meal."

"I couldn't agree more."  Gretchen pushed away her plate--the gateau
though small, was simply too rich--and sat back upon her chair.
Cigarettes had always appealed to her, and she indulged on occasion
herself--in private.  Cigars she could not abide, however, for they
reminded her too much of her father's odious acquaintances--men who
came to play cards each week throughout her childhood.  "If I might
ask," she said quietly, folding her hands the table, "how do you feel
about women smoking, Professor?"

He paused, with the open case upon the table before him and looked
steadily into her eyes.  "Miss Haviland," he answered, "we are living
in an enlightened age, are we not?  Women's suffrage--and frankly, it
will happen soon, I'm sure.  University educations--such as your own."

She nodded, but let him continue.  He studied the top of the cigarette
case with some care.  From the side, a hovering waiter produced a
shallow ashtray of white china and set it near his elbow.

"I have no objection," he continued, "to a woman pursuing whatever
takes her fancy, provided she's reached majority.  The same as any
man."  He fingered the cigarette case, closing and then opening it
again.  "A strong and independent mind is an asset in anyone, male or
female."  He looked up hesitantly.  "You seem to have such a mind.
You've read Mr. Darwin, I believe--and I suspect other progressive
thinkers as well."

Gretchen smiled at him, but tilted her head with some puzzlement.

"You once called me more evolved," he replied answering her unspoken
question.  "That's hardly the sort of phrase an unread woman would use.
I presumed you have read Mr. Darwin, among others." He curled his lips
upon seeing her amusement and continued speaking.  "It is the mind, I
believe--and the soul, if one is religiously inclined--that really
distinguishes man from the lesser animals.  Female no less than
male--we all possess that most human of traits."

His extensive reply was more favorable and pointed than she would have
thought possible.  It pleased her, and confirmed a great deal that she
had sensed about him.  "Then you won't mind at all if I join you?"

"By all means," he returned without hesitation, holding the silver case
toward her.  She deftly removed a cigarette, and tamping it upon her
fingernail twice, held it out for him to light.  She bent back her
wrist and let it dangle between her long fingers while he lit his own
cigarette.

"Now that we've learned all about me," she said, blowing a thin stream
of smoke away, "perhaps you'll tell me about yourself, Professor."

"Please," he said, setting the ashtray in the middle of the table, "do
call me Antoine.  We needn't be so formal, I think."

She laughed quietly.  "Antoine."

"My mother was French," he stated quietly.

Gretchen caught his use of the past tense, but did not inquire further.
"No doubt she is the source of your excellent French."

"Maman did speak French to me as a child--but my French is quite poor
for anything but domestic conversation."

"From what little I speak," she replied, drawing on her cigarette, "you
sounded quite fluent."  She let the smoke linger on her lips, then blew
it away softly.

"Why thank you for the compliment...Miss Haviland."

"Oh, dear," she said, realizing what she had neglected.  "My Christian
name is Gretchen."

"Gretchen Haviland," he repeated slowly.  "That has quite a
satisfactory ring to it."

She complimented him on the quality of the tobacco when they were
finished smoking.  The hour was past nine o'clock, so they left the
café and walked into the street.  The fog had descended, lower and
thicker than before.  Occasional carriages appeared, rumbling quietly
along.  Tatters of mist blew sluggishly past the gaslights.

"I hope you shall allow me the pleasure of escorting you home this
evening?" he asked as they walked.

"I should be honored."

He held out his elbow, and she slipped her gloved hand over his
forearm.  They walked in silence toward her rooming house, both
enjoying the quiet of the evening.  It seemed much warmer than before,
and Gretchen thought a snow was about to fall.  The air had the crisp
scent of impending snow.

"I am delighted," Professor Bridwell said after a while, "that you were
not busy this evening.  Surely you must have so many friends.  Other
engagements."

"No," she answered, "I have very few friends.  But
surely--Antoine--there must be any number of ladies who would be far
better company..."

"I'm too involved with my books, I fear.  Studying all the time;
preparing lectures--while the ladies run off with younger rakes." He
glanced at her with a teasing half-smile.  "I'll be thirty-five come
February."

Gretchen laughed to hear him say such things.  But she was pleased that
she had guessed his age so nearly.

"I fear," he continued, "it is my fate to attend concerts alone, and
remain unwed all my life."

"Well," Gretchen replied, "there's something sad in that then, is there
not?   Two studious people nearly of an age, with no other
attachments."  She looked sidelong at him.  "And with Christmas so
near..."

"Yes," he agreed, "there is a bit of sadness in that.  Have you no
family nearby, Gretchen?"

"No, they're ALL in Connecticut--too far to visit this year, and my
rooming house would hardly be suitable for inviting them to visit me."

He laughed pleasantly at this.  Yet she did not tell him that she was
estranged from her parents.

"Besides my family being far away--at twenty-nine, one cannot be
forever running home to one's parents, can one?" she asked.

"I do understand that," he said.  "Fancy the two of us then, alone for
Christmas--it seems rather a shame."

"It does indeed," Gretchen answered looking away.  Snow had begun to
fall, silently and hesitantly.  The flakes, drifting between the empty
branches of trees along the avenue, seemed as large as walnuts; as
fluffy as eider down.

The professor laid his hand across Gretchen's gloved hand, suddenly
holding her fingers delicately beneath his.  She smiled at him, looking
at his eyes; his mop of black hair, now bedecked with great white
snowflakes.  They stopped walking for an instant, and she could see the
wisps of mist curling away from his mouth as he opened his lips.  The
street was silent.  He took a step toward her and she realized that she
was not looking far up into his eyes--he was not so much taller than
herself as she had imagined.  She thought--suddenly aware of the
palpitation of her heart--she found herself hoping he would kiss her.
She believed he would kiss her, just then, and she let out her hot
breath.  Mist escaped her expectant lips on the faintest of breezes.

They stood for a long moment, facing each other until he turned slowly
and stepped forward.  Gretchen continued walking beside him with her
hand upon his arm.  They crossed the street and at last were near her
rooming house.  She looked up at the falling snow against a gray sky;
the tangle of branches above them; the misty pools of light beneath the
gaslights.  She glanced at his serene face, turning, though she
continued to walk.

"I believe you almost kissed me back there, did you not Professor?"

"So, it's 'Professor' again, is it?"  He smiled the faintest of smiles
and looked away down the street.  "Miss Haviland, you did not ask to be
kissed--back there."  She turned quickly in front of him to catch his
gaze, so that he had to stop.  "Not in so many words," he added, "I
mean--you hesitated as much as I."

"Fancy that," she replied with a laugh, and began walking again,
swinging her legs gaily, letting her skirt billow.

He touched her hand, draped over his forearm, and she felt the warmth
of his fingers through her glove.  They walked on beneath bare branches
and quietly falling snow.  It seemed far too warm for snow--tropical
almost, as if the gaslights were warming the whole scene--the whole
world.  Winter was about to melt--the sun might even rise the next
instant and spring would return in a blaze of gold and green with soft
rain, the scent of flowers.

"In future, perhaps I _shall_ ask, Professor."  She leaned to grip his
arm more tightly and whispered.  "Perhaps I shall."


=====================================================================



                     THE HUNGARIAN LIGHTBULB


When the symphony orchestra collapsed in ruin after years spent
floating, half-dead near bankruptcy, all the musicians were thrown out
of work.  At that time nearly everyone was out of work anyway--many of
them discovered soup-kitchens and soon found employment at menial
tasks.  A few--the lucky or the talented, but mostly those with both
luck and talent--found other musical work well below stevedore's wages.

Jurgen had tremendous talent but no luck, yet he could not imagine any
other life than being a violist.  He would not look for non-musical
work--everything was unsuitable, and certainly unattractive.  He took
the little savings he had and went West thinking to find a place less
crowded with hungry musicians.  Rather than spend his money on
transportation he settled on a romantic adventure:  he made friends
around the freight yards and rode the rails west until he arrived on
the outskirts of a comfortably large city with a clean look--and there
he decided to make his home.  The city was familiar to him, as a
professional musician:  it boasted a fine orchestra whose conductor,
one Laurence Lamonte, frequently found shockingly intimate details of
his flamboyant life splashed across the pages of the tabloids.

In River Street, on the wrong side of the tracks, after hours spent
walking from the fashionable districts gradually down the economic
ladder into a grimy, dilapidated neighborhood, Jurgen found the
Charleston Residence Hotel.  Brownstone, four stories tall, it had two
windows boarded up on the third floor and unmistakable blackened marks
from a conflagration that had never been cleaned away.  There was a
sign in the window advertising a weekly fee he thought he could
manage--if the sign was not out of date.  It was yellow, curling at the
edges, and could hardly be read behind a smudged window laced with
years of accumulated cobwebs.  It did not seem like a wholesome
place--but the price was right so he walked into the tiny lobby.

"Have you any rooms?" he asked.  He had his viola case tucked under one
arm and his cracked leather valise dangling from the other hand.

A short, bearded and balding man in a brown, pinstriped suit that might
once have been new, stood at the front desk.  The stub of a stale cigar
not two inches long was stuffed between his lips.  He cupped a hairy
hand to his ear.

"I asked," Jurgen stated in a much louder voice, "whether you have a
room to let."

"Yeah, we got a lot of rooms."  The man grinned.  "How many you want?"

"One will be sufficient, thank you."  Jurgen carefully laid out one
week's rent on the counter.  "This is a week in advance." The man
cupped his hand to his ear, and Jurgen was compelled to repeat himself
loudly.

The man swept the money away--into a vest pocket--and handed his new
resident a rusty key attached to a length of twine.  Scrawled on a
paper tag attached to the twine were numbers: a three, separated by a
dash from the number thirteen.

"By the way," Jurgen inquired loudly, leaning forward, "you don't mind
if I PRACTICE the VIOLA during the DAY?"

"Violin?" the man yelled back, with a dismissing wave.  "Just so I
don't get no complaints, you do what you want."

Relieved at last to be in some lodging--his last few nights had been
spent in damp freight cars, cowering with one or another group of
indigents--Jurgen ascended the stairs quietly to the third floor.  Room
thirteen was the last door on the right at the front of the building.
He opened the door after some fumbling with the key.  His room proved
to be the one with boards on the windows.  Only one window, on the
left, was not boarded.  The inside had been freshly painted, with white
paint.  The floor was painted a deep gray and partly covered with a
threadbare carpet patterned mostly in shades of brown.

Jurgen fumbled for the light switch and pushed it with a loud click.  A
single bulb glowed dimly, suspended from a long wire in the center of
the room.  He thought that was par for the course.  At these rates, he
could not have expected much more.  Setting down his valise, he thought
he would be in better lodgings uptown, as soon as he found work.  He
laid his viola case reverently across the raw, wooden arms of the
room's single chair.  In the far left corner was a single bed.  It had
no sheets, but a few worn blankets folded neatly at the foot of the
mattress.  Along the opposite wall stood a sink with a cracked mirror
hanging above it, a flush toilet with a broken ceramic handle, and a
closet door--again with a broken handle.  No towels.  Putting his
valise upon the bed, Jurgen went back down the stairs to see about
sheets and towels.

"This is a residence hotel," the proprietor told him, pushing back the
few hairs on his head with one hand.  "Sheets in the hall closet at the
far end--towels too.  Maid comes once a week.  Toss your sheets and
towels down the chute on Tuesday morning.  Don't use too many."

"Thank you," Jurgen replied, making a sincere effort at politeness.  He
went back up and got a set of sheets and a towel, then made his bed.

Afterwards, he sat on the edge of the bed and opened his valise.  It
contained underwear, a well-used black suit with tails, a silk shirt, a
silk hat, soap and shaving kit, and sheaf after sheaf of printed music.
Everything else he had sold as necessary; his cash was securely
fastened around his waist in a money-belt.  He wondered if there were a
trustworthy bank in the neighborhood.  Tomorrow, he decided, he would
have to go look.

Jurgen surveyed the room carefully before turning in.  On the back of
the door a relatively new calendar was posted with two thumb tacks.  It
featured a blonde woman with exquisite, long legs and a coquettish
smile--advertising a well-known brand of chewing tobacco.  It was the
fourteenth of November, he noted.  Fifty-seven years ago to the day,
his grandmother had arrived in New York harbor from Hungary, dragging
two young children behind her--with less money in her pocket than he
had.  He pondered her memory for a moment--she had been his first
musical mentor--then went to switch off the light.  He laid down on the
bed beneath fresh cotton sheets and listened to the far-off sounds of
the city--automobiles and trains, mostly--until he fell asleep.

Early in the morning, just after sunrise, Jurgen practiced the viola
quietly for an hour or so.  He had no clock, but when he judged, by the
sounds in the street that the time was past ten, he left the hotel with
his viola case under his arm.  He spent the day wandering from
street-corner to street-corner in a nearby business district along the
river-front and by late afternoon had earned enough money for two full
meals.  He played mostly Stephen Foster songs--everyone knew them and
they never failed to bring smiles.  Occasionally a nice old lady would
stop, and blushing, ask whether he knew one or another of the favorite
tunes of some prior season.  As often as not, he had never heard of the
tune, but when he did know it, he laid into the instrument with such
vigor that they always left a good fistful of coins in his open case.

At a nearby hash-slinging café where the cook had anchors tattooed on
both arms, Jurgen ate breakfast.  The waitress wore silk stockings
beneath a soiled uniform with pink and white stripes--and kept a pencil
behind each ear, both of them dull with their ends chewed.  Jurgen
reflected with some amusement that his description could fit the people
as well as the pencils.

The next several days passed in much the same manner.  Each evening,
rather than hastily becoming a regular at any one café, Jurgen
preferred to try all of the nearby places in the hope of finding the
most comfortable of the lot.  On Thursday evening he saw a small sign
he had never noticed before, though he had walked down the same street
several times.  Neatly lettered by hand in blue upon a white ground--it
said simply "Calcutta", with a downward pointing arrow.  Jurgen
descended the dark stairwell, passed one steel door tightly closed with
a padlock, and found the next door unlocked.  The same name was painted
on the door at eye level.  He pushed it open and walked in, thinking he
might have found a restaurant a bit more exotic than the typical run of
cafés in the neighborhood.  The lighting was dim, the decor dark and
spare.  The place was lined with booths near the door, but opened into
a space taken over by a checkerboard tiled floor.

He could see there were only a few customers--not more than five or six
people, all told.  He looked around slowly, holding his viola case
under one arm, the other hand laid across the top of it.  He was the
only white person in the establishment.

Nobody turned to look at him, but kept right on with what they were
doing--drinking and smoking, talking quietly.  It seemed comfortable
enough--and he saw some things of interest at the far end of the room.
There were four tables at that end, under dim spotlights.

Jurgen walked slowly past the booths toward the spotlights.  A double
bass sat on its side near the wall as if it were the subject of the
spotlights' illumination--it might jump up and break into song any
moment.  An upright piano stood on the left, lurking warily in the
shadows, its top opened like a gaping jaw.  Jurgen knew this all meant
music, and he made his way between the tables to sit at the one nearest
the instruments.  It was partially shadowed; an unlit candle stood in
the middle of the round table--a square table-cloth in white and red
checks draped haphazardly, held in place by the candle.  Jurgen sat
slowly on the nearest wooden chair, facing the music; it creaked when
he put his weight on it.  He set his viola case on the table and slid
it over so he could rest his left elbow on it.

He felt something stir, and looked behind him.  A young woman in a
sleeveless sky-blue dress approached out of the shadows.  Her hair was
pulled back tightly against her head, white teeth gleamed in her dark
face.  She put one hand on the back of the nearest booth, and leaning
upon it, spoke to him.

"What'll it be?" she asked with quiet confidence.  Her chin rose when
she finished asking, and she tilted her head to one side, smiling.

Jurgen gazed at her--she had a pretty face with a narrow chin and
strikingly high cheekbones; her black eyes sparkled in the spotlight.
He did not really feel like drinking anything intoxicating.  "Something
soft," he answered.  "Something quite soft and preferably cool."

She nodded and shoved herself off gracefully, trailing one hand.
Jurgen waited in silence, staring at the back wall.  In a few moments,
the musicians--three black men in baggy workmen's clothing--returned to
the stage, gliding in stealthily, creeping from a door to one side.
Without a word, they sat down and took up their instruments.  The bass
player heaved his double bass upright, then sat upon a high stool and
plucked a few notes.  The third man carried a clarinet, and standing in
the center, whipped his fingers through a few scales without making any
sound.  They stole a few glances at each other--then broke
simultaneously into a molten jazz number, hot as a blast furnace.
Jurgen sat back slowly in his chair.  The blazing tune crackled and
sparked, then settled into a long, burning ember; he could feel the
thin layer of ash building up around the coals until it gradually
settled into a warm mound of slow heat.

The young woman appeared with a Coca-Cola in a tall glass--Jurgen only
glanced at her when she set it down, and returned his attention to the
musicians.  She slid past his table and strode under the center
spotlight--the clarinetist moved to one side without missing a note,
nodding at her.  She whirled around, snapped her fingers to pick up the
slow beat--and launched into song, so softly at first, he was not sure
she was singing.

Her voice soon rose in a solo, weaving in and out of the clarinet's
melody.  Flames rushed up to greet her voice--Jurgen felt the hairs
rising on the back of his neck and across his scalp.  She sang without
words; low tones with all the plaintiveness of an English horn,
blending into the ensemble; and at times her voice rose like a
whispering flute and broke into autumn leaves, tumbling in a light
breeze--the fire crackled behind her.

The splendor of it entranced Jurgen and he forgot his drink, putting
both elbows on the table to watch the woman sing.  Her voice was so
rich, so well-trained and supple--he could have imagined her on the
opera stage, singing mezzo-soprano.

The ensemble rushed to a climax that shattered like a glass against
stone, and was silent.  There were applause from the dark café behind.
Jurgen could make out each individual in the audience--pitifully few
customers to hear such a singer!  He applauded firmly, with authority,
and continued until the last clap had died behind him; three more
decisive claps and he stopped.

The band played a few more numbers, standard blues fare and a popular
show-tune or two--the young woman sang, standing perfectly still with
her eyes closed, alone beneath a spotlight.  She bowed at last, arms
outstretched with a beautiful smile, and strode into the back.  The
musicians followed her out to take another break.

The pianist lagged behind, following the others to the door, then
turned around and sat down at Jurgen's table, pulling his chair close.
The man had a few days' growth of beard.  He was completely
bald--perhaps shaved, Jurgen decided--and his smile revealed one
missing tooth and two silver teeth.  When he spoke, his voice was deep
and bubbly, like a slow pot of soup, simmering.  "Don't get many o' yer
kind here," he began.

Jurgen flushed suddenly and swallowed, feeling a sense of impending
panic.  He gaped momentarily, unable to think of a reply.  Might it be
prudent to withdraw?

The man sat back and laughed loudly, thrusting his thumbs into his
belt.  He thrust his head forward suddenly, grinning.  "I mean--you
play that fiddle or jes set yer elbow on it?"

Jurgen felt instantly relieved, and regained his composure.  "Certainly
I play it," he said, returning the man's smile with some hesitation.

"Maybe you'll play somethin' for me?  Maybe I'll buy yer drink, too."

"Well--I--I've never played much--any--jazz," Jurgen said slowly.
"Folk tunes, show-tunes--on rare occasions.  I'm a symphony violist, by
profession."

"Oh," the man answered, wrinkling his brow.  "I see.  Well, it don'
have to be blue--jes wanna see what you got... If it ain't much
trouble?"

"Alright." Jurgen pulled his viola case toward himself, and scooted his
chair back to give himself some room.  He opened the case, strummed the
strings once to check the instrument's tuning--close enough, he
decided.  While he rosined his bow he tried to decide where he should
start.  He settled on a Hungarian folk tune his grandmother used to
play for him.  It had a homey, intimate quality; rather simple and
easily manipulated.  He readied himself and then poured his heart into
playing that tune--he worked it around, swished it a few times, tried
some variations, caught the fever, and finished off with a fast
spiccato variation.

"Sounds like gypsy music," the man said when he had finished.  "Hot
blood."

Jurgen smiled.  "My grandmother--was Hungarian."

"Say," the man said, laying his hand atop the viola case, "why don' you
join us awhile?  Play anything you like--jes name it.  We know 'bout
most anything."  He stood up and thrust out his hand.  "My name's Al,"
he concluded.

Jurgen clasped his hand. "Jurgen.  A pleasure to meet you, Mr. Al."

Al chuckled.  "Nah, jes Plain Al.  Come on over here..."

When the other musicians returned, the young woman--Al introduced her
as Mabel--sat at the table Jurgen had vacated.  He took one chair and
joined the clarinetist under the spotlight.

"Do you know--uh..." Jurgen paused.  "How about 'Nice Work if You Can
Get It'?"

"Mmm.  George & Ira...," the clarinetist intoned reverently with a wide
grin.  "Ever'body knows that one..."

They played a seething rendition that soon had Mabel on her feet,
improvising alongside Jurgen.  She stood facing him, doubling over to
peer into his eyes, undulating while they ran on in imitative
counterpoint, two fish in a creek spilling down a mountainside.  The
piano and clarinet stopped while they took the tune up on their own,
turning it over, peeking into all the hidden motives, each musically
entwined in the other.  Mabel was breathless