The Project Gutenberg eBook of A Girl of the Limberlost
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: A Girl of the Limberlost

Author: Gene Stratton-Porter


        
Release date: March 8, 2006 [eBook #125]
                Most recently updated: October 29, 2024

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/125

Credits: Judith Boss


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A GIRL OF THE LIMBERLOST ***

[Illustration]

A GIRL OF THE LIMBERLOST

By Gene Stratton-Porter




To All Girls Of The Limberlost
In General
And One
Jeanette Helen Porter
In Particular




CHARACTERS:

ELNORA, who collects moths to pay for her education, and lives the
Golden Rule.
PHILIP AMMON, who assists in moth hunting, and gains a new conception
of love.
MRS. COMSTOCK, who lost a delusion and found a treasure.
WESLEY SINTON, who always did his best.
MARGARET SINTON, who “mothers” Elnora.
BILLY, a boy from real life.
EDITH CARR, who discovers herself.
HART HENDERSON, to whom love means all things.
POLLY AMMON, who pays an old score.
TOM LEVERING, engaged to Polly.
TERENCE O’MORE, Freckles grown tall.
MRS. O’MORE, who remained the Angel.
TERENCE, ALICE and LITTLE BROTHER, the O’MORE children.




CONTENTS



  A GIRL OF THE LIMBERLOST
  CHAPTER I 
  CHAPTER II 
  CHAPTER III 
  CHAPTER IV 
  CHAPTER V 
  CHAPTER VI 
  CHAPTER VII 
  CHAPTER VIII 
  CHAPTER IX 
  CHAPTER X 
  CHAPTER XI 
  CHAPTER XII 
  CHAPTER XIII 
  CHAPTER XIV 
  CHAPTER XV 
  CHAPTER XVI 
  CHAPTER XVII 
  CHAPTER XVIII 
  CHAPTER XIX 
  CHAPTER XX 
  CHAPTER XXI 
  CHAPTER XXII 
  CHAPTER XXIII 
  CHAPTER XXIV 
  CHAPTER XXV 




A GIRL OF THE LIMBERLOST




CHAPTER I

WHEREIN ELNORA GOES TO HIGH SCHOOL AND LEARNS MANY LESSONS NOT FOUND IN
HER BOOKS


“Elnora Comstock, have you lost your senses?” demanded the angry voice
of Katharine Comstock while she glared at her daughter.

“Why mother!” faltered the girl.

“Don’t you ‘why mother’ me!” cried Mrs. Comstock. “You know very well
what I mean. You’ve given me no peace until you’ve had your way about
this going to school business; I’ve fixed you good enough, and you’re
ready to start. But no child of mine walks the streets of Onabasha
looking like a play-actress woman. You wet your hair and comb it down
modest and decent and then be off, or you’ll have no time to find where
you belong.”

Elnora gave one despairing glance at the white face, framed in a most
becoming riot of reddish-brown hair, which she saw in the little
kitchen mirror. Then she untied the narrow black ribbon, wet the comb
and plastered the waving curls close to her head, bound them fast,
pinned on the skimpy black hat and opened the back door.

“You’ve gone so plumb daffy you are forgetting your dinner,” jeered her
mother.

“I don’t want anything to eat,” replied Elnora.

“You’ll take your dinner or you’ll not go one step. Are you crazy? Walk
almost three miles and no food from six in the morning until six at
night. A pretty figure you’d cut if you had your way! And after I’ve
gone and bought you this nice new pail and filled it especial to start
on!”

Elnora came back with a face still whiter and picked up the lunch.
“Thank you, mother! Good-bye!” she said. Mrs. Comstock did not reply.
She watched the girl follow the long walk to the gate and go from sight
on the road, in the bright sunshine of the first Monday of September.

“I bet a dollar she gets enough of it by night!” commented Mrs.
Comstock.

Elnora walked by instinct, for her eyes were blinded with tears. She
left the road where it turned south, at the corner of the Limberlost,
climbed a snake fence and entered a path worn by her own feet. Dodging
under willow and scrub oak branches she came at last to the faint
outline of an old trail made in the days when the precious timber of
the swamp was guarded by armed men. This path she followed until she
reached a thick clump of bushes. From the debris in the end of a hollow
log she took a key that unlocked the padlock of a large weatherbeaten
old box, inside of which lay several books, a butterfly apparatus, and
a small cracked mirror. The walls were lined thickly with gaudy
butterflies, dragonflies, and moths. She set up the mirror and once
more pulling the ribbon from her hair, she shook the bright mass over
her shoulders, tossing it dry in the sunshine. Then she straightened
it, bound it loosely, and replaced her hat. She tugged vainly at the
low brown calico collar and gazed despairingly at the generous length
of the narrow skirt. She lifted it as she would have cut it if
possible. That disclosed the heavy high leather shoes, at sight of
which she seemed positively ill, and hastily dropped the skirt. She
opened the pail, removed the lunch, wrapped it in the napkin, and
placed it in a small pasteboard box. Locking the case again she hid the
key and hurried down the trail.

She followed it around the north end of the swamp and then entered a
footpath crossing a farm leading in the direction of the spires of the
city to the northeast. Again she climbed a fence and was on the open
road. For an instant she leaned against the fence staring before her,
then turned and looked back. Behind her lay the land on which she had
been born to drudgery and a mother who made no pretence of loving her;
before her lay the city through whose schools she hoped to find means
of escape and the way to reach the things for which she cared. When she
thought of how she appeared she leaned more heavily against the fence
and groaned; when she thought of turning back and wearing such clothing
in ignorance all the days of her life she set her teeth firmly and went
hastily toward Onabasha.

On the bridge crossing a deep culvert at the suburbs she glanced
around, and then kneeling she thrust the lunch box between the
foundation and the flooring. This left her empty-handed as she
approached the big stone high school building. She entered bravely and
inquired her way to the office of the superintendent. There she learned
that she should have come the previous week and arranged about her
classes. There were many things incident to the opening of school, and
one man unable to cope with all of them.

“Where have you been attending school?” he asked, while he advised the
teacher of Domestic Science not to telephone for groceries until she
knew how many she would have in her classes; wrote an order for
chemicals for the students of science; and advised the leader of the
orchestra to hire a professional to take the place of the bass violist,
reported suddenly ill.

“I finished last spring at Brushwood school, district number nine,”
said Elnora. “I have been studying all summer. I am quite sure I can do
the first year work, if I have a few days to get started.”

“Of course, of course,” assented the superintendent. “Almost invariably
country pupils do good work. You may enter first year, and if it is too
difficult, we will find it out speedily. Your teachers will tell you
the list of books you must have, and if you will come with me I will
show you the way to the auditorium. It is now time for opening
exercises. Take any seat you find vacant.”

Elnora stood before the entrance and stared into the largest room she
ever had seen. The floor sloped to a yawning stage on which a band of
musicians, grouped around a grand piano, were tuning their instruments.
She had two fleeting impressions. That it was all a mistake; this was
no school, but a grand display of enormous ribbon bows; and the second,
that she was sinking, and had forgotten how to walk. Then a burst from
the orchestra nerved her while a bevy of daintily clad, sweet-smelling
things that might have been birds, or flowers, or possibly gaily
dressed, happy young girls, pushed her forward. She found herself
plodding across the back of the auditorium, praying for guidance, to an
empty seat.

As the girls passed her, vacancies seemed to open to meet them. Their
friends were moving over, beckoning and whispering invitations. Every
one else was seated, but no one paid any attention to the white-faced
girl stumbling half-blindly down the aisle next the farthest wall. So
she went on to the very end facing the stage. No one moved, and she
could not summon courage to crowd past others to several empty seats
she saw. At the end of the aisle she paused in desperation, while she
stared back at the whole forest of faces most of which were now turned
upon her.

In a flash came the full realization of her scanty dress, her pitiful
little hat and ribbon, her big, heavy shoes, her ignorance of where to
go or what to do; and from a sickening wave which crept over her, she
felt she was going to become very ill. Then out of the mass she saw a
pair of big, brown boy eyes, three seats from her, and there was a
message in them. Without moving his body he reached forward and with a
pencil touched the back of the seat before him. Instantly Elnora took
another step which brought her to a row of vacant front seats.

She heard laughter behind her; the knowledge that she wore the only hat
in the room burned her; every matter of moment, and some of none at
all, cut and stung. She had no books. Where should she go when this was
over? What would she give to be on the trail going home! She was
shaking with a nervous chill when the music ceased, and the
superintendent arose, and coming down to the front of the flower-decked
platform, opened a Bible and began to read. Elnora did not know what he
was reading, and she felt that she did not care. Wildly she was racking
her brain to decide whether she should sit still when the others left
the room or follow, and ask some one where the Freshmen went first.

In the midst of the struggle one sentence fell on her ear. “Hide me
under the shadow of Thy wings.”

Elnora began to pray frantically. “Hide me, O God, hide me, under the
shadow of Thy wings.”

Again and again she implored that prayer, and before she realized what
was coming, every one had arisen and the room was emptying rapidly.
Elnora hurried after the nearest girl and in the press at the door
touched her sleeve timidly.

“Will you please tell me where the Freshmen go?” she asked huskily.

The girl gave her one surprised glance, and drew away.

“Same place as the fresh women,” she answered, and those nearest her
laughed.

Elnora stopped praying suddenly and the colour crept into her face.
“I’ll wager you are the first person I meet when I find it,” she said
and stopped short. “Not that! Oh, I must not do that!” she thought in
dismay. “Make an enemy the first thing I do. Oh, not that!”

She followed with her eyes as the young people separated in the hall,
some climbing stairs, some disappearing down side halls, some entering
adjoining doors. She saw the girl overtake the brown-eyed boy and speak
to him. He glanced back at Elnora with a scowl on his face. Then she
stood alone in the hall.

Presently a door opened and a young woman came out and entered another
room. Elnora waited until she returned, and hurried to her. “Would you
tell me where the Freshmen are?” she panted.

“Straight down the hall, three doors to your left,” was the answer, as
the girl passed.

“One minute please, oh please,” begged Elnora: “Should I knock or just
open the door?”

“Go in and take a seat,” replied the teacher.

“What if there aren’t any seats?” gasped Elnora.

“Classrooms are never half-filled, there will be plenty,” was the
answer.

Elnora removed her hat. There was no place to put it, so she carried it
in her hand. She looked infinitely better without it. After several
efforts she at last opened the door and stepping inside faced a smaller
and more concentrated battery of eyes.

“The superintendent sent me. He thinks I belong here,” she said to the
professor in charge of the class, but she never before heard the voice
with which she spoke. As she stood waiting, the girl of the hall passed
on her way to the blackboard, and suppressed laughter told Elnora that
her thrust had been repeated.

“Be seated,” said the professor, and then because he saw Elnora was
desperately embarrassed he proceeded to lend her a book and to ask her
if she had studied algebra. She said she had a little, but not the same
book they were using. He asked her if she felt that she could do the
work they were beginning, and she said she did.

That was how it happened, that three minutes after entering the room
she was told to take her place beside the girl who had gone last to the
board, and whose flushed face and angry eyes avoided meeting Elnora’s.
Being compelled to concentrate on her proposition she forgot herself.
When the professor asked that all pupils sign their work she firmly
wrote “Elnora Comstock” under her demonstration. Then she took her seat
and waited with white lips and trembling limbs, as one after another
professor called the names on the board, while their owners arose and
explained their propositions, or “flunked” if they had not found a
correct solution. She was so eager to catch their forms of expression
and prepare herself for her recitation, that she never looked from the
work on the board, until clearly and distinctly, “Elnora Cornstock,”
called the professor.

The dazed girl stared at the board. One tiny curl added to the top of
the first curve of the m in her name, had transformed it from a good
old English patronymic that any girl might bear proudly, to Cornstock.
Elnora sat speechless. When and how did it happen? She could feel the
wave of smothered laughter in the air around her. A rush of anger
turned her face scarlet and her soul sick. The voice of the professor
addressed her directly.

“This proposition seems to be beautifully demonstrated, Miss
Cornstalk,” he said. “Surely, you can tell us how you did it.”

That word of praise saved her. She could do good work. They might wear
their pretty clothes, have their friends and make life a greater misery
than it ever before had been for her, but not one of them should do
better work or be more womanly. That lay with her. She was tall,
straight, and handsome as she arose.

“Of course I can explain my work,” she said in natural tones. “What I
can’t explain is how I happened to be so stupid as to make a mistake in
writing my own name. I must have been a little nervous. Please excuse
me.”

She went to the board, swept off the signature with one stroke, then
rewrote it plainly. “My name is Comstock,” she said distinctly. She
returned to her seat and following the formula used by the others made
her first high school recitation.

As Elnora resumed her seat Professor Henley looked at her steadily. “It
puzzles me,” he said deliberately, “how you can write as beautiful a
demonstration, and explain it as clearly as ever has been done in any
of my classes and still be so disturbed as to make a mistake in your
own name. Are you very sure you did that yourself, Miss Comstock?”

“It is impossible that any one else should have done it,” answered
Elnora.

“I am very glad you think so,” said the professor. “Being Freshmen, all
of you are strangers to me. I should dislike to begin the year with you
feeling there was one among you small enough to do a trick like that.
The next proposition, please.”

When the hour had gone the class filed back to the study room and
Elnora followed in desperation, because she did not know where else to
go. She could not study as she had no books, and when the class again
left the room to go to another professor for the next recitation, she
went also. At least they could put her out if she did not belong there.
Noon came at last, and she kept with the others until they dispersed on
the sidewalk. She was so abnormally self-conscious she fancied all the
hundreds of that laughing, throng saw and jested at her. When she
passed the brown-eyed boy walking with the girl of her encounter, she
knew, for she heard him say: “Did you really let that gawky piece of
calico get ahead of you?” The answer was indistinct.

Elnora hurried from the city. She intended to get her lunch, eat it in
the shade of the first tree, and then decide whether she would go back
or go home. She knelt on the bridge and reached for her box, but it was
so very light that she was prepared for the fact that it was empty,
before opening it. There was one thing for which to be thankful. The
boy or tramp who had seen her hide it, had left the napkin. She would
not have to face her mother and account for its loss. She put it in her
pocket, and threw the box into the ditch. Then she sat on the bridge
and tried to think, but her brain was confused.

“Perhaps the worst is over,” she said at last. “I will go back. What
would mother say to me if I came home now?”

So she returned to the high school, followed some other pupils to the
coat room, hung her hat, and found her way to the study where she had
been in the morning. Twice that afternoon, with aching head and empty
stomach, she faced strange professors, in different branches. Once she
escaped notice; the second time the worst happened. She was asked a
question she could not answer.

“Have you not decided on your course, and secured your books?” inquired
the professor.

“I have decided on my course,” replied Elnora, “I do not know where to
ask for my books.”

“Ask?” the professor was bewildered.

“I understood the books were furnished,” faltered Elnora.

“Only to those bringing an order from the township trustee,” replied
the Professor.

“No! Oh no!” cried Elnora. “I will have them to-morrow,” and gripped
her desk for support for she knew that was not true. Four books,
ranging perhaps at a dollar and a half apiece; would her mother buy
them? Of course she would not—could not.

Did not Elnora know the story of old. There was enough land, but no one
to do clearing and farm. Tax on all those acres, recently the new
gravel road tax added, the expense of living and only the work of two
women to meet all of it. She was insane to think she could come to the
city to school. Her mother had been right. The girl decided that if
only she lived to reach home, she would stay there and lead any sort of
life to avoid more of this torture. Bad as what she wished to escape
had been, it was nothing like this. She never could live down the
movement that went through the class when she inadvertently revealed
the fact that she had expected books to be furnished. Her mother would
not secure them; that settled the question.

But the end of misery is never in a hurry to come; before the day was
over the superintendent entered the room and explained that pupils from
the country were charged a tuition of twenty dollars a year. That
really was the end. Previously Elnora had canvassed a dozen methods for
securing the money for books, ranging all the way from offering to wash
the superintendent’s dishes to breaking into the bank. This additional
expense made her plans so wildly impossible, there was nothing to do
but hold up her head until she was from sight.

Down the long corridor alone among hundreds, down the long street alone
among thousands, out into the country she came at last. Across the
fence and field, along the old trail once trodden by a boy’s bitter
agony, now stumbled a white-faced girl, sick at heart. She sat on a log
and began to sob in spite of her efforts at self-control. At first it
was physical breakdown, later, thought came crowding.

Oh the shame, the mortification! Why had she not known of the tuition?
How did she happen to think that in the city books were furnished?
Perhaps it was because she had read they were in several states. But
why did she not know? Why did not her mother go with her? Other
mothers—but when had her mother ever been or done anything at all like
other mothers? Because she never had been it was useless to blame her
now. Elnora realized she should have gone to town the week before,
called on some one and learned all these things herself. She should
have remembered how her clothing would look, before she wore it in
public places. Now she knew, and her dreams were over. She must go home
to feed chickens, calves, and pigs, wear calico and coarse shoes, and
with averted head, pass a library all her life. She sobbed again.

“For pity’s sake, honey, what’s the matter?” asked the voice of the
nearest neighbour, Wesley Sinton, as he seated himself beside Elnora.
“There, there,” he continued, smearing tears all over her face in an
effort to dry them. “Was it as bad as that, now? Maggie has been just
wild over you all day. She’s got nervouser every minute. She said we
were foolish to let you go. She said your clothes were not right, you
ought not to carry that tin pail, and that they would laugh at you. By
gum, I see they did!”

“Oh, Uncle Wesley,” sobbed the girl, “why didn’t she tell me?”

“Well, you see, Elnora, she didn’t like to. You got such a way of
holding up your head, and going through with things. She thought some
way that you’d make it, till you got started, and then she begun to see
a hundred things we should have done. I reckon you hadn’t reached that
building before she remembered that your skirt should have been pleated
instead of gathered, your shoes been low, and lighter for hot September
weather, and a new hat. Were your clothes right, Elnora?”

The girl broke into hysterical laughter. “Right!” she cried. “Right!
Uncle Wesley, you should have seen me among them! I was a picture!
They’ll never forget me. No, they won’t get the chance, for they’ll see
me again to-morrow!

“Now that is what I call spunk, Elnora! Downright grit,” said Wesley
Sinton. “Don’t you let them laugh you out. You’ve helped Margaret and
me for years at harvest and busy times, what you’ve earned must amount
to quite a sum. You can get yourself a good many clothes with it.”

“Don’t mention clothes, Uncle Wesley,” sobbed Elnora, “I don’t care now
how I look. If I don’t go back all of them will know it’s because I am
so poor I can’t buy my books.”

“Oh, I don’t know as you are so dratted poor,” said Sinton
meditatively. “There are three hundred acres of good land, with fine
timber as ever grew on it.”

“It takes all we can earn to pay the tax, and mother wouldn’t cut a
tree for her life.”

“Well then, maybe, I’ll be compelled to cut one for her,” suggested
Sinton. “Anyway, stop tearing yourself to pieces and tell me. If it
isn’t clothes, what is it?”

“It’s books and tuition. Over twenty dollars in all.”

“Humph! First time I ever knew you to be stumped by twenty dollars,
Elnora,” said Sinton, patting her hand.

“It’s the first time you ever knew me to want money,” answered Elnora.
“This is different from anything that ever happened to me. Oh, how can
I get it, Uncle Wesley?”

“Drive to town with me in the morning and I’ll draw it from the bank
for you. I owe you every cent of it.”

“You know you don’t owe me a penny, and I wouldn’t touch one from you,
unless I really could earn it. For anything that’s past I owe you and
Aunt Margaret for all the home life and love I’ve ever known. I know
how you work, and I’ll not take your money.”

“Just a loan, Elnora, just a loan for a little while until you can earn
it. You can be proud with all the rest of the world, but there are no
secrets between us, are there, Elnora?”

“No,” said Elnora, “there are none. You and Aunt Margaret have given me
all the love there has been in my life. That is the one reason above
all others why you shall not give me charity. Hand me money because you
find me crying for it! This isn’t the first time this old trail has
known tears and heartache. All of us know that story. Freckles stuck to
what he undertook and won out. I stick, too. When Duncan moved away he
gave me all Freckles left in the swamp, and as I have inherited his
property maybe his luck will come with it. I won’t touch your money,
but I’ll win some way. First, I’m going home and try mother. It’s just
possible I could find second-hand books, and perhaps all the tuition
need not be paid at once. Maybe they would accept it quarterly. But oh,
Uncle Wesley, you and Aunt Margaret keep on loving me! I’m so lonely,
and no one else cares!”

Wesley Sinton’s jaws met with a click. He swallowed hard on bitter
words and changed what he would have liked to say three times before it
became articulate.

“Elnora,” he said at last, “if it hadn’t been for one thing I’d have
tried to take legal steps to make you ours when you were three years
old. Maggie said then it wasn’t any use, but I’ve always held on. You
see, I was the first man there, honey, and there are things you see,
that you can’t ever make anybody else understand. She loved him Elnora,
she just made an idol of him. There was that oozy green hole, with the
thick scum broke, and two or three big bubbles slowly rising that were
the breath of his body. There she was in spasms of agony, and beside
her the great heavy log she’d tried to throw him. I can’t ever forgive
her for turning against you, and spoiling your childhood as she has,
but I couldn’t forgive anybody else for abusing her. Maggie has got no
mercy on her, but Maggie didn’t see what I did, and I’ve never tried to
make it very clear to her. It’s been a little too plain for me ever
since. Whenever I look at your mother’s face, I see what she saw, so I
hold my tongue and say, in my heart, ‘Give her a mite more time.’ Some
day it will come. She does love you, Elnora. Everybody does, honey.
It’s just that she’s feeling so much, she can’t express herself. You be
a patient girl and wait a little longer. After all, she’s your mother,
and you’re all she’s got, but a memory, and it might do her good to let
her know that she was fooled in that.”

“It would kill her!” cried the girl swiftly. “Uncle Wesley, it would
kill her! What do you mean?”

“Nothing,” said Wesley Sinton soothingly. “Nothing, honey. That was
just one of them fool things a man says, when he is trying his best to
be wise. You see, she loved him mightily, and they’d been married only
a year, and what she was loving was what she thought he was. She hadn’t
really got acquainted with the man yet. If it had been even one more
year, she could have borne it, and you’d have got justice. Having been
a teacher she was better educated and smarter than the rest of us, and
so she was more sensitive like. She can’t understand she was loving a
dream. So I say it might do her good if somebody that knew, could tell
her, but I swear to gracious, I never could. I’ve heard her out at the
edge of that quagmire calling in them wild spells of hers off and on
for the last sixteen years, and imploring the swamp to give him back to
her, and I’ve got out of bed when I was pretty tired, and come down to
see she didn’t go in herself, or harm you. What she feels is too deep
for me. I’ve got to respectin’ her grief, and I can’t get over it. Go
home and tell your ma, honey, and ask her nice and kind to help you. If
she won’t, then you got to swallow that little lump of pride in your
neck, and come to Aunt Maggie, like you been a-coming all your life.”

“I’ll ask mother, but I can’t take your money, Uncle Wesley, indeed I
can’t. I’ll wait a year, and earn some, and enter next year.”

“There’s one thing you don’t consider, Elnora,” said the man earnestly.
“And that’s what you are to Maggie. She’s a little like your ma. She
hasn’t given up to it, and she’s struggling on brave, but when we
buried our second little girl the light went out of Maggie’s eyes, and
it’s not come back. The only time I ever see a hint of it is when she
thinks she’s done something that makes you happy, Elnora. Now, you go
easy about refusing her anything she wants to do for you. There’s times
in this world when it’s our bounden duty to forget ourselves, and think
what will help other people. Young woman, you owe me and Maggie all the
comfort we can get out of you. There’s the two of our own we can’t ever
do anything for. Don’t you get the idea into your head that a fool
thing you call pride is going to cut us out of all the pleasure we have
in life beside ourselves.”

“Uncle Wesley, you are a dear,” said Elnora. “Just a dear! If I can’t
possibly get that money any way else on earth, I’ll come and borrow it
of you, and then I’ll pay it back if I must dig ferns from the swamp
and sell them from door to door in the city. I’ll even plant them, so
that they will be sure to come up in the spring. I have been sort of
panic stricken all day and couldn’t think. I can gather nuts and sell
them. Freckles sold moths and butterflies, and I’ve a lot collected. Of
course, I am going back to-morrow! I can find a way to get the books.
Don’t you worry about me. I am all right!

“Now, what do you think of that?” inquired Wesley Sinton of the swamp
in general. “Here’s our Elnora come back to stay. Head high and right
as a trivet! You’ve named three ways in three minutes that you could
earn ten dollars, which I figure would be enough, to start you. Let’s
go to supper and stop worrying!”

Elnora unlocked the case, took out the pail, put the napkin in it,
pulled the ribbon from her hair, binding it down tightly again and
followed to the road. From afar she could see her mother in the
doorway. She blinked her eyes, and tried to smile as she answered
Wesley Sinton, and indeed she did feel better. She knew now what she
had to expect, where to go, and what to do. Get the books she must;
when she had them, she would show those city girls and boys how to
prepare and recite lessons, how to walk with a brave heart; and they
could show her how to wear pretty clothes and have good times.

As she neared the door her mother reached for the pail. “I forgot to
tell you to bring home your scraps for the chickens,” she said.

Elnora entered. “There weren’t any scraps, and I’m hungry again as I
ever was in my life.”

“I thought likely you would be,” said Mrs. Comstock, “and so I got
supper ready. We can eat first, and do the work afterward. What kept
you so? I expected you an hour ago.”

Elnora looked into her mother’s face and smiled. It was a queer sort of
a little smile, and would have reached the depths with any normal
mother.

“I see you’ve been bawling,” said Mrs. Comstock. “I thought you’d get
your fill in a hurry. That’s why I wouldn’t go to any expense. If we
keep out of the poor-house we have to cut the corners close. It’s
likely this Brushwood road tax will eat up all we’ve saved in years.
Where the land tax is to come from I don’t know. It gets bigger every
year. If they are going to dredge the swamp ditch again they’ll just
have to take the land to pay for it. I can’t, that’s all! We’ll get up
early in the morning and gather and hull the beans for winter, and put
in the rest of the day hoeing the turnips.”

Elnora again smiled that pitiful smile.

“Do you think I didn’t know that I was funny and would be laughed at?”
she asked.

“Funny?” cried Mrs. Comstock hotly.

“Yes, funny! A regular caricature,” answered Elnora. “No one else wore
calico, not even one other. No one else wore high heavy shoes, not even
one. No one else had such a funny little old hat; my hair was not
right, my ribbon invisible compared with the others, I did not know
where to go, or what to do, and I had no books. What a spectacle I made
for them!” Elnora laughed nervously at her own picture. “But there are
always two sides! The professor said in the algebra class that he never
had a better solution and explanation than mine of the proposition he
gave me, which scored one for me in spite of my clothes.”

“Well, I wouldn’t brag on myself!”

“That was poor taste,” admitted Elnora. “But, you see, it is a case of
whistling to keep up my courage. I honestly could see that I would have
looked just as well as the rest of them if I had been dressed as they
were. We can’t afford that, so I have to find something else to brace
me. It was rather bad, mother!”

“Well, I’m glad you got enough of it!”

“Oh, but I haven’t,” hurried in Elnora. “I just got a start. The
hardest is over. To-morrow they won’t be surprised. They will know what
to expect. I am sorry to hear about the dredge. Is it really going
through?”

“Yes. I got my notification today. The tax will be something enormous.
I don’t know as I can spare you, even if you are willing to be a
laughing-stock for the town.”

With every bite Elnora’s courage returned, for she was a healthy young
thing.

“You’ve heard about doing evil that good might come from it,” she said.
“Well, mother mine, it’s something like that with me. I’m willing to
bear the hard part to pay for what I’ll learn. Already I have selected
the ward building in which I shall teach in about four years. I am
going to ask for a room with a south exposure so that the flowers and
moths I take in from the swamp to show the children will do well.”

“You little idiot!” said Mrs. Comstock. “How are you going to pay your
expenses?”

“Now that is just what I was going to ask you!” said Elnora. “You see,
I have had two startling pieces of news to-day. I did not know I would
need any money. I thought the city furnished the books, and there is an
out-of-town tuition, also. I need ten dollars in the morning. Will you
please let me have it?”

“Ten dollars!” cried Mrs. Comstock. “Ten dollars! Why don’t you say a
hundred and be done with it! I could get one as easy as the other. I
told you! I told you I couldn’t raise a cent. Every year expenses grow
bigger and bigger. I told you not to ask for money!”

“I never meant to,” replied Elnora. “I thought clothes were all I
needed and I could bear them. I never knew about buying books and
tuition.”

“Well, I did!” said Mrs. Comstock. “I knew what you would run into! But
you are so bull-dog stubborn, and so set in your way, I thought I would
just let you try the world a little and see how you liked it!”

Elnora pushed back her chair and looked at her mother.

“Do you mean to say,” she demanded, “that you knew, when you let me go
into a city classroom and reveal the fact before all of them that I
expected to have my books handed out to me; do you mean to say that you
knew I had to pay for them?”

Mrs. Comstock evaded the direct question.

“Anybody but an idiot mooning over a book or wasting time prowling the
woods would have known you had to pay. Everybody has to pay for
everything. Life is made up of pay, pay, pay! It’s always and forever
pay! If you don’t pay one way you do another! Of course, I knew you had
to pay. Of course, I knew you would come home blubbering! But you don’t
get a penny! I haven’t one cent, and can’t get one! Have your way if
you are determined, but I think you will find the road somewhat rocky.”

“Swampy, you mean, mother,” corrected Elnora. She arose white and
trembling. “Perhaps some day God will teach me how to understand you.
He knows I do not now. You can’t possibly realize just what you let me
go through to-day, or how you let me go, but I’ll tell you this: You
understand enough that if you had the money, and would offer it to me,
I wouldn’t touch it now. And I’ll tell you this much more. I’ll get it
myself. I’ll raise it, and do it some honest way. I am going back
to-morrow, the next day, and the next. You need not come out, I’ll do
the night work, and hoe the turnips.”

It was ten o’clock when the chickens, pigs, and cattle were fed, the
turnips hoed, and a heap of bean vines was stacked beside the back
door.




CHAPTER II

WHEREIN WESLEY AND MARGARET GO SHOPPING, AND ELNORA’S WARDROBE IS
REPLENISHED


Wesley Sinton walked down the road half a mile and turned at the lane
leading to his home. His heart was hot and filled with indignation. He
had told Elnora he did not blame her mother, but he did. His wife met
him at the door.

“Did you see anything of Elnora?” she questioned.

“Most too much, Maggie,” he answered. “What do you say to going to
town? There’s a few things has to be got right away.”

“Where did you see her, Wesley?”

“Along the old Limberlost trail, my girl, torn to pieces sobbing. Her
courage always has been fine, but the thing she met to-day was too much
for her. We ought to have known better than to let her go that way. It
wasn’t only clothes; there were books, and entrance fees for
out-of-town people, that she didn’t know about; while there must have
been jeers, whispers, and laughing. Maggie, I feel as if I’d been a
traitor to those girls of ours. I ought to have gone in and seen about
this school business. Don’t cry, Maggie. Get me some supper, and I’ll
hitch up and see what we can do now.”

“What can we do, Wesley?

“I don’t just know. But we’ve got to do something. Kate Comstock will
be a handful, while Elnora will be two, but between us we must see that
the girl is not too hard pressed about money, and that she is dressed
so she is not ridiculous. She’s saved us the wages of a woman many a
day, can’t you make her some decent dresses?”

“Well, I’m not just what you call expert, but I could beat Kate
Comstock all to pieces. I know that skirts should be pleated to the
band instead of gathered, and full enough to sit in, and short enough
to walk in. I could try. There are patterns for sale. Let’s go right
away, Wesley.”

“Set me a bit of supper, while I hitch up.”

Margaret built a fire, made coffee, and fried ham and eggs. She set out
pie and cake and had enough for a hungry man by the time the carriage
was at the door, but she had no appetite. She dressed while Wesley ate,
put away the food while he dressed, and then they drove toward the city
through the beautiful September evening, and as they went they planned
for Elnora. The trouble was, not whether they were generous enough to
buy what she needed, but whether she would accept their purchases, and
what her mother would say.

They went to a drygoods store and when a clerk asked what they wanted
to see neither of them knew, so they stepped aside and held a whispered
consultation.

“What had we better get, Wesley?”

“Dresses,” said Wesley promptly,

“But how many dresses, and what kind?”

“Blest if I know!” exclaimed Wesley. “I thought you would manage that.
I know about some things I’m going to get.”

At that instant several high school girls came into the store and
approached them.

“There!” exclaimed Wesley breathlessly. “There, Maggie! Like them!
That’s what she needs! Buy like they have!”

Margaret stared. What did they wear? They were rapidly passing; they
seemed to have so much, and she could not decide so quickly. Before she
knew it she was among them.

“I beg your pardon, but won’t you wait one minute?” she asked.

The girls stopped with wondering faces.

“It’s your clothes,” explained Mrs. Sinton. “You look just beautiful to
me. You look exactly as I should have wanted to see my girls. They both
died of diphtheria when they were little, but they had yellow hair,
dark eyes and pink cheeks, and everybody thought they were lovely. If
they had lived, they’d been near your age now, and I’d want them to
look like you.”

There was sympathy on every girl face.

“Why thank you!” said one of them. “We are very sorry for you.”

“Of course you are,” said Margaret. “Everybody always has been. And
because I can’t ever have the joy of a mother in thinking for my girls
and buying pretty things for them, there is nothing left for me, but to
do what I can for some one who has no mother to care for her. I know a
girl, who would be just as pretty as any of you, if she had the
clothes, but her mother does not think about her, so I mother her some
myself.”

“She must be a lucky girl,” said another.

“Oh, she loves me,” said Margaret, “and I love her. I want her to look
just like you do. Please tell me about your clothes. Are these the
dresses and hats you wear to school? What kind of goods are they, and
where do you buy them?”

The girls began to laugh and cluster around Margaret. Wesley strode
down the store with his head high through pride in her, but his heart
was sore over the memory of two little faces under Brushwood sod. He
inquired his way to the shoe department.

“Why, every one of us have on gingham or linen dresses,” they said,
“and they are our school clothes.”

For a few moments there was a babel of laughing voices explaining to
the delighted Margaret that school dresses should be bright and pretty,
but simple and plain, and until cold weather they should wash.

“I’ll tell you,” said Ellen Brownlee, “my father owns this store, I
know all the clerks. I’ll take you to Miss Hartley. You tell her just
how much you want to spend, and what you want to buy, and she will know
how to get the most for your money. I’ve heard papa say she was the
best clerk in the store for people who didn’t know precisely what they
wanted.”

“That’s the very thing,” agreed Margaret. “But before you go, tell me
about your hair. Elnora’s hair is bright and wavy, but yours is silky
as hackled flax. How do you do it?”

“Elnora?” asked four girls in concert.

“Yes, Elnora is the name of the girl I want these things for.”

“Did she come to the high school to-day?” questioned one of them.

“Was she in your classes?” demanded Margaret without reply.

Four girls stood silent and thought fast. Had there been a strange girl
among them, and had she been overlooked and passed by with
indifference, because she was so very shabby? If she had appeared as
much better than they, as she had looked worse, would her reception
have been the same?

“There was a strange girl from the country in the Freshman class
to-day,” said Ellen Brownlee, “and her name was Elnora.”

“That was the girl,” said Margaret.

“Are her people so very poor?” questioned Ellen.

“No, not poor at all, come to think of it,” answered Margaret. “It’s a
peculiar case. Mrs. Comstock had a great trouble and she let it change
her whole life and make a different woman of her. She used to be
lovely; now she is forever saving and scared to death for fear they
will go to the poorhouse; but there is a big farm, covered with lots of
good timber. The taxes are high for women who can’t manage to clear and
work the land. There ought to be enough to keep two of them in good
shape all their lives, if they only knew how to do it. But no one ever
told Kate Comstock anything, and never will, for she won’t listen. All
she does is droop all day, and walk the edge of the swamp half the
night, and neglect Elnora. If you girls would make life just a little
easier for her it would be the finest thing you ever did.”

All of them promised they would.

“Now tell me about your hair,” persisted Margaret Sinton.

So they took her to a toilet counter, and she bought the proper hair
soap, also a nail file, and cold cream, for use after windy days. Then
they left her with the experienced clerk, and when at last Wesley found
her she was loaded with bundles and the light of other days was in her
beautiful eyes. Wesley also carried some packages.

“Did you get any stockings?” he whispered.

“No, I didn’t,” she said. “I was so interested in dresses and hair
ribbons and a—a hat——” she hesitated and glanced at Wesley. “Of course,
a hat!” prompted Wesley. “That I forgot all about those horrible shoes.
She’s got to have decent shoes, Wesley.”

“Sure!” said Wesley. “She’s got decent shoes. But the man said some
brown stockings ought to go with them. Take a peep, will you!”

Wesley opened a box and displayed a pair of thick-soled, beautifully
shaped brown walking shoes of low cut. Margaret cried out with
pleasure.

“But do you suppose they are the right size, Wesley? What did you get?”

“I just said for a girl of sixteen with a slender foot.”

“Well, that’s about as near as I could come. If they don’t fit when she
tries them, we will drive straight in and change them. Come on now,
let’s get home.”

All the way they discussed how they should give Elnora their purchases
and what Mrs. Comstock would say.

“I am afraid she will be awful mad,” said Margaret.

“She’ll just rip!” replied Wesley graphically. “But if she wants to
leave the raising of her girl to the neighbours, she needn’t get
fractious if they take some pride in doing a good job. From now on I
calculate Elnora shall go to school; and she shall have all the clothes
and books she needs, if I go around on the back of Kate Comstock’s land
and cut a tree, or drive off a calf to pay for them. Why I know one
tree she owns that would put Elnora in heaven for a year. Just think of
it, Margaret! It’s not fair. One-third of what is there belongs to
Elnora by law, and if Kate Comstock raises a row I’ll tell her so, and
see that the girl gets it. You go to see Kate in the morning, and I’ll
go with you. Tell her you want Elnora’s pattern, that you are going to
make her a dress, for helping us. And sort of hint at a few more
things. If Kate balks, I’ll take a hand and settle her. I’ll go to law
for Elnora’s share of that land and sell enough to educate her.”

“Why, Wesley Sinton, you’re perfectly wild.”

“I’m not! Did you ever stop to think that such cases are so frequent
there have been laws made to provide for them? I can bring it up in
court and force Kate to educate Elnora, and board and clothe her till
she’s of age, and then she can take her share.”

“Wesley, Kate would go crazy!”

“She’s crazy now. The idea of any mother living with as sweet a girl as
Elnora and letting her suffer till I find her crying like a funeral. It
makes me fighting mad. All uncalled for. Not a grain of sense in it.
I’ve offered and offered to oversee clearing her land and working her
fields. Let her sell a good tree, or a few acres. Something is going to
be done, right now. Elnora’s been fairly happy up to this, but to spoil
the school life she’s planned, is to ruin all her life. I won’t have
it! If Elnora won’t take these things, so help me, I’ll tell her what
she is worth, and loan her the money and she can pay me back when she
comes of age. I am going to have it out with Kate Comstock in the
morning. Here we are! You open up what you got while I put away the
horses, and then I’ll show you.”

When Wesley came from the barn Margaret had four pieces of crisp
gingham, a pale blue, a pink, a gray with green stripes and a rich
brown and blue plaid. On each of them lay a yard and a half of wide
ribbon to match. There were handkerchiefs and a brown leather belt. In
her hands she held a wide-brimmed tan straw hat, having a high crown
banded with velvet strips each of which fastened with a tiny gold
buckle.

“It looks kind of bare now,” she explained. “It had three quills on it
here.”

“Did you have them taken off?” asked Wesley.

“Yes, I did. The price was two and a half for the hat, and those things
were a dollar and a half apiece. I couldn’t pay that.”

“It does seem considerable,” admitted Wesley, “but will it look right
without them?”

“No, it won’t!” said Margaret. “It’s going to have quills on it. Do you
remember those beautiful peacock wing feathers that Phoebe Simms gave
me? Three of them go on just where those came off, and nobody will ever
know the difference. They match the hat to a moral, and they are just a
little longer and richer than the ones that I had taken off. I was
wondering whether I better sew them on to-night while I remember how
they set, or wait till morning.”

“Don’t risk it!” exclaimed Wesley anxiously. “Don’t you risk it! Sew
them on right now!”

“Open your bundles, while I get the thread,” said Margaret.

Wesley unwrapped the shoes. Margaret took them up and pinched the
leather and stroked them.

“My, but they are fine!” she cried.

Wesley picked up one and slowly turned it in his big hands. He glanced
at his foot and back to the shoe.

“It’s a little bit of a thing, Margaret,” he said softly. “Like as not
I’ll have to take it back. It seems as if it couldn’t fit.”

“It seems as if it didn’t dare do anything else,” said Margaret.
“That’s a happy little shoe to get the chance to carry as fine a girl
as Elnora to high school. Now what’s in the other box?”

Wesley looked at Margaret doubtfully.

“Why,” he said, “you know there’s going to be rainy days, and those
things she has now ain’t fit for anything but to drive up the cows——”

“Wesley, did you get high shoes, too?”

“Well, she ought to have them! The man said he would make them cheaper
if I took both pairs at once.”

Margaret laughed aloud. “Those will do her past Christmas,” she
exulted. “What else did you buy?”

“Well sir,” said Wesley, “I saw something to-day. You told me about
Kate getting that tin pail for Elnora to carry to high school and you
said you told her it was a shame. I guess Elnora was ashamed all right,
for to-night she stopped at the old case Duncan gave her, and took out
that pail, where it had been all day, and put a napkin inside it.
Coming home she confessed she was half starved because she hid her
dinner under a culvert, and a tramp took it. She hadn’t had a bite to
eat the whole day. But she never complained at all, she was pleased
that she hadn’t lost the napkin. So I just inquired around till I found
this, and I think it’s about the ticket.”

Wesley opened the package and laid a brown leather lunch box on the
table. “Might be a couple of books, or drawing tools or most anything
that’s neat and genteel. You see, it opens this way.”

It did open, and inside was a space for sandwiches, a little porcelain
box for cold meat or fried chicken, another for salad, a glass with a
lid which screwed on, held by a ring in a corner, for custard or jelly,
a flask for tea or milk, a beautiful little knife, fork, and spoon
fastened in holders, and a place for a napkin.

Margaret was almost crying over it.

“How I’d love to fill it!” she exclaimed.

“Do it the first time, just to show Kate Comstock what love is!” said
Wesley. “Get up early in the morning and make one of those dresses
to-morrow. Can’t you make a plain gingham dress in a day? I’ll pick a
chicken, and you fry it and fix a little custard for the cup, and do it
up brown. Go on, Maggie, you do it!”

“I never can,” said Margaret. “I am slow as the itch about sewing, and
these are not going to be plain dresses when it comes to making them.
There are going to be edgings of plain green, pink, and brown to the
bias strips, and tucks and pleats around the hips, fancy belts and
collars, and all of it takes time.”

“Then Kate Comstock’s got to help,” said Wesley. “Can the two of you
make one, and get that lunch to-morrow?”

“Easy, but she’ll never do it!”

“You see if she doesn’t!” said Wesley. “You get up and cut it out, and
soon as Elnora is gone I’ll go after Kate myself. She’ll take what I’ll
say better alone. But she’ll come, and she’ll help make the dress.
These other things are our Christmas gifts to Elnora. She’ll no doubt
need them more now than she will then, and we can give them just as
well. That’s yours, and this is mine, or whichever way you choose.”

Wesley untied a good brown umbrella and shook out the folds of a long,
brown raincoat. Margaret dropped the hat, arose and took the coat. She
tried it on, felt it, cooed over it and matched it with the umbrella.

“Did it look anything like rain to-night?” she inquired so anxiously
that Wesley laughed.

“And this last bundle?” she said, dropping back in her chair, the coat
still over her shoulders.

“I couldn’t buy this much stuff for any other woman and nothing for my
own,” said Wesley. “It’s Christmas for you, too, Margaret!” He shook
out fold after fold of soft gray satiny goods that would look lovely
against Margaret’s pink cheeks and whitening hair.

“Oh, you old darling!” she exclaimed, and fled sobbing into his arms.

But she soon dried her eyes, raked together the coals in the cooking
stove and boiled one of the dress patterns in salt water for half an
hour. Wesley held the lamp while she hung the goods on the line to dry.
Then she set the irons on the stove so they would be hot the first
thing in the morning.




CHAPTER III

WHEREIN ELNORA VISITS THE BIRD WOMAN, AND OPENS A BANK ACCOUNT


Four o’clock the following morning Elnora was shelling beans. At six
she fed the chickens and pigs, swept two of the rooms of the cabin,
built a fire, and put on the kettle for breakfast. Then she climbed the
narrow stairs to the attic she had occupied since a very small child,
and dressed in the hated shoes and brown calico, plastered down her
crisp curls, ate what breakfast she could, and pinning on her hat
started for town.

“There is no sense in your going for an hour yet,” said her mother.

“I must try to discover some way to earn those books,” replied Elnora.
“I am perfectly positive I shall not find them lying beside the road
wrapped in tissue paper, and tagged with my name.”

She went toward the city as on yesterday. Her perplexity as to where
tuition and books were to come from was worse but she did not feel
quite so badly. She never again would have to face all of it for the
first time. There had been times yesterday when she had prayed to be
hidden, or to drop dead, and neither had happened. “I believe the best
way to get an answer to prayer is to work for it,” muttered Elnora
grimly.

Again she followed the trail to the swamp, rearranged her hair and left
the tin pail. This time she folded a couple of sandwiches in the
napkin, and tied them in a neat light paper parcel which she carried in
her hand. Then she hurried along the road to Onabasha and found a
book-store. There she asked the prices of the list of books that she
needed, and learned that six dollars would not quite supply them. She
anxiously inquired for second-hand books, but was told that the only
way to secure them was from the last year’s Freshmen. Just then Elnora
felt that she positively could not approach any of those she supposed
to be Sophomores and ask to buy their old books. The only balm the girl
could see for the humiliation of yesterday was to appear that day with
a set of new books.

“Do you wish these?” asked the clerk hurriedly, for the store was
rapidly filling with school children wanting anything from a dictionary
to a pen.

“Yes,” gasped Elnora, “Oh, yes! But I cannot pay for them just now.
Please let me take them, and I will pay for them on Friday, or return
them as perfect as they are. Please trust me for them a few days.”

“I’ll ask the proprietor,” he said. When he came back Elnora knew the
answer before he spoke.

“I’m sorry,” he said, “but Mr. Hann doesn’t recognize your name. You
are not a customer of ours, and he feels that he can’t take the risk.”

Elnora clumped out of the store, the thump of her heavy shoes beating
as a hammer on her brain. She tried two other dealers with the same
result, and then in sick despair came into the street. What could she
do? She was too frightened to think. Should she stay from school that
day and canvass the homes appearing to belong to the wealthy, and try
to sell beds of wild ferns, as she had suggested to Wesley Sinton? What
would she dare ask for bringing in and planting a clump of ferns? How
could she carry them? Would people buy them? She slowly moved past the
hotel and then glanced around to see if there were a clock anywhere,
for she felt sure the young people passing her constantly were on their
way to school.

There it stood in a bank window in big black letters staring straight
at her:

WANTED: CATERPILLARS, COCOONS, CHRYSALIDES, PUPAE CASES, BUTTERFLIES,
MOTHS, INDIAN RELICS OF ALL KINDS. HIGHEST SCALE OF PRICES PAID IN CASH

Elnora caught the wicket at the cashier’s desk with both hands to brace
herself against disappointment.

“Who is it wants to buy cocoons, butterflies, and moths?” she panted.

“The Bird Woman,” answered the cashier. “Have you some for sale?”

“I have some, I do not know if they are what she would want.”

“Well, you had better see her,” said the cashier. “Do you know where
she lives?”

“Yes,” said Elnora. “Would you tell me the time?”

“Twenty-one after eight,” was the answer.

She had nine minutes to reach the auditorium or be late. Should she go
to school, or to the Bird Woman? Several girls passed her walking
swiftly and she remembered their faces. They were hurrying to school.
Elnora caught the infection. She would see the Bird Woman at noon.
Algebra came first, and that professor was kind. Perhaps she could slip
to the superintendent and ask him for a book for the next lesson, and
at noon—“Oh, dear Lord make it come true,” prayed Elnora, at noon
possibly she could sell some of those wonderful shining-winged things
she had been collecting all her life around the outskirts of the
Limberlost.

As she went down the long hall she noticed the professor of mathematics
standing in the door of his recitation room. When she passed him he
smiled and spoke to her.

“I have been watching for you,” he said, and Elnora stopped bewildered.

“For me?” she questioned.

“Yes,” said Professor Henley. “Step inside.”

Elnora followed him into the room and closed the door behind them.

“At teachers’ meeting last evening, one of the professors mentioned
that a pupil had betrayed in class that she had expected her books to
be furnished by the city. I thought possibly it was you. Was it?”

“Yes,” breathed Elnora.

“That being the case,” said Professor Henley, “it just occurred to me
as you had expected that, you might require a little time to secure
them, and you are too fine a mathematician to fall behind for want of
supplies. So I telephoned one of our Sophomores to bring her last
year’s books this morning. I am sorry to say they are somewhat abused,
but the text is all here. You can have them for two dollars, and pay
when you are ready. Would you care to take them?”

Elnora sat suddenly, because she could not stand another instant. She
reached both hands for the books, and said never a word. The professor
was silent also.

At last Elnora arose, hugging those books to her heart as a mother
clasps a baby.

“One thing more,” said the professor. “You may pay your tuition
quarterly. You need not bother about the first instalment this month.
Any time in October will do.”

It seemed as if Elnora’s gasp of relief must have reached the soles of
her brogans.

“Did any one ever tell you how beautiful you are!” she cried.

As the professor was lank, tow-haired and so near-sighted, that he
peered at his pupils through spectacles, no one ever had.

“No,” said Professor Henley, “I’ve waited some time for that; for which
reason I shall appreciate it all the more. Come now, or we shall be
late for opening exercises.”

So Elnora entered the auditorium a second time. Her face was like the
brightest dawn that ever broke over the Limberlost. No matter about the
lumbering shoes and skimpy dress. No matter about anything, she had the
books. She could take them home. In her garret she could commit them to
memory, if need be. She could prove that clothes were not all. If the
Bird Woman did not want any of the many different kinds of specimens
she had collected, she was quite sure now she could sell ferns, nuts,
and a great many things. Then, too, a girl made a place for her that
morning, and several smiled and bowed. Elnora forgot everything save
her books, and that she was where she could use them
intelligently—everything except one little thing away back in her head.
Her mother had known about the books and the tuition, and had not told
her when she agreed to her coming.

At noon Elnora took her little parcel of lunch and started to the home
of the Bird Woman. She must know about the specimens first and then she
would walk to the suburbs somewhere and eat a few bites. She dropped
the heavy iron knocker on the door of a big red log cabin, and her
heart thumped at the resounding stroke.

“Is the Bird Woman at home?” she asked of the maid.

“She is at lunch,” was the answer.

“Please ask her if she will see a girl from the Limberlost about some
moths?” inquired Elnora.

“I never need ask, if it’s moths,” laughed the girl. “Orders are to
bring any one with specimens right in. Come this way.”

Elnora followed down the hall and entered a long room with high
panelled wainscoting, old English fireplace with an overmantel and
closets of peculiar china filling the corners. At a bare table of oak,
yellow as gold, sat a woman Elnora often had watched and followed
covertly around the Limberlost. The Bird Woman was holding out a hand
of welcome.

“I heard!” she laughed. “A little pasteboard box, or just the mere word
‘specimen,’ passes you at my door. If it is moths I hope you have
hundreds. I’ve been very busy all summer and unable to collect, and I
need so many. Sit down and lunch with me, while we talk it over. From
the Limberlost, did you say?”

“I live near the swamp,” replied Elnora. “Since it’s so cleared I dare
go around the edge in daytime, though we are all afraid at night.”

“What have you collected?” asked the Bird Woman, as she helped Elnora
to sandwiches unlike any she ever before had tasted, salad that seemed
to be made of many familiar things, and a cup of hot chocolate that
would have delighted any hungry schoolgirl.

“I am afraid I am bothering you for nothing, and imposing on you,” she
said. “That ‘collected’ frightens me. I’ve only gathered. I always
loved everything outdoors, so I made friends and playmates of them.
When I learned that the moths die so soon, I saved them especially,
because there seemed no wickedness in it.”

“I have thought the same thing,” said the Bird Woman encouragingly.
Then because the girl could not eat until she learned about the moths,
the Bird Woman asked Elnora if she knew what kinds she had.

“Not all of them,” answered Elnora. “Before Mr. Duncan moved away he
often saw me near the edge of the swamp and he showed me the box he had
fixed for Freckles, and gave me the key. There were some books and
things, so from that time on I studied and tried to take moths right,
but I am afraid they are not what you want.”

“Are they the big ones that fly mostly in June nights?” asked the Bird
Woman.

“Yes,” said Elnora. “Big gray ones with reddish markings, pale
blue-green, yellow with lavender, and red and yellow.”

“What do you mean by ‘red and yellow?’” asked the Bird Woman so quickly
that the girl almost jumped.

“Not exactly red,” explained Elnora, with tremulous voice. “A reddish,
yellowish brown, with canary-coloured spots and gray lines on their
wings.”

“How many of them?” It was the same quick question.

“I had over two hundred eggs,” said Elnora, “but some of them didn’t
hatch, and some of the caterpillars died, but there must be at least a
hundred perfect ones.”

“Perfect! How perfect?” cried the Bird Woman.

“I mean whole wings, no down gone, and all their legs and antennae,”
faltered Elnora.

“Young woman, that’s the rarest moth in America,” said the Bird Woman
solemnly. “If you have a hundred of them, they are worth a hundred
dollars according to my list. I can use all that are not damaged.”

“What if they are not pinned right,” quavered Elnora.

“If they are perfect, that does not make the slightest difference. I
know how to soften them so that I can put them into any shape I choose.
Where are they? When may I see them?”

“They are in Freckles’s old case in the Limberlost,” said Elnora. “I
couldn’t carry many for fear of breaking them, but I could bring a few
after school.”

“You come here at four,” said the Bird Woman, “and we will drive out
with some specimen boxes, and a price list, and see what you have to
sell. Are they your very own? Are you free to part with them?”

“They are mine,” said Elnora. “No one but God knows I have them. Mr.
Duncan gave me the books and the box. He told Freckles about me, and
Freckles told him to give me all he left. He said for me to stick to
the swamp and be brave, and my hour would come, and it has! I know most
of them are all right, and oh, I do need the money!”

“Could you tell me?” asked the Bird Woman softly.

“You see the swamp and all the fields around it are so full,” explained
Elnora. “Every day I felt smaller and smaller, and I wanted to know
more and more, and pretty soon I grew desperate, just as Freckles did.
But I am better off than he was, for I have his books, and I have a
mother; even if she doesn’t care for me as other girls’ mothers do for
them, it’s better than no one.”

The Bird Woman’s glance fell, for the girl was not conscious of how
much she was revealing. Her eyes were fixed on a black pitcher filled
with goldenrod in the centre of the table and she was saying what she
thought.

“As long as I could go to the Brushwood school I was happy, but I
couldn’t go further just when things were the most interesting, so I
was determined I’d come to high school and mother wouldn’t consent. You
see there’s plenty of land, but father was drowned when I was a baby,
and mother and I can’t make money as men do. The taxes are higher every
year, and she said it was too expensive. I wouldn’t give her any