The Project Gutenberg eBook of Maria; Or, The Wrongs of Woman
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Maria; Or, The Wrongs of Woman

Author: Mary Wollstonecraft


        
Release date: March 8, 2006 [eBook #134]
                Most recently updated: October 29, 2024

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/134

Credits: Judith Boss and David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MARIA; OR, THE WRONGS OF WOMAN ***

MARIA

or
The Wrongs of Woman

by MARY WOLLSTONECRAFT


(1759-1797)

After the edition of 1798




CONTENTS

 MARIA
 PREFACE
 AUTHOR’S PREFACE
 CHAPTER 1
 CHAPTER 2
 CHAPTER 3
 CHAPTER 4
 CHAPTER 5
 CHAPTER 6
 CHAPTER 7
 CHAPTER 8
 CHAPTER 9
 CHAPTER 10
 CHAPTER 11
 CHAPTER 12
 CHAPTER 13
 CHAPTER 14
 APPENDIX
 CHAPTER 15
 CHAPTER 16
 CHAPTER 17
 CONCLUSION




MARIA

or

The Wrongs of Woman




PREFACE


The public are here presented with the last literary attempt of an
author, whose fame has been uncommonly extensive, and whose talents
have probably been most admired, by the persons by whom talents are
estimated with the greatest accuracy and discrimination. There are few,
to whom her writings could in any case have given pleasure, that would
have wished that this fragment should have been suppressed, because it
is a fragment. There is a sentiment, very dear to minds of taste and
imagination, that finds a melancholy delight in contemplating these
unfinished productions of genius, these sketches of what, if they had
been filled up in a manner adequate to the writer’s conception, would
perhaps have given a new impulse to the manners of a world.

The purpose and structure of the following work, had long formed a
favourite subject of meditation with its author, and she judged them
capable of producing an important effect. The composition had been in
progress for a period of twelve months. She was anxious to do justice
to her conception, and recommenced and revised the manuscript several
different times. So much of it as is here given to the public, she was
far from considering as finished, and, in a letter to a friend directly
written on this subject, she says, “I am perfectly aware that some of
the incidents ought to be transposed, and heightened by more harmonious
shading; and I wished in some degree to avail myself of criticism,
before I began to adjust my events into a story, the outline of which I
had sketched in my mind.”[1] The only friends to whom the author
communicated her manuscript, were Mr. Dyson, the translator of the
Sorcerer, and the present editor; and it was impossible for the most
inexperienced author to display a stronger desire of profiting by the
censures and sentiments that might be suggested.[2]

 [1] A more copious extract of this letter is subjoined to the author’s
 preface.


 [2] The part communicated consisted of the first fourteen chapters.


In revising these sheets for the press, it was necessary for the
editor, in some places, to connect the more finished parts with the
pages of an older copy, and a line or two in addition sometimes
appeared requisite for that purpose. Wherever such a liberty has been
taken, the additional phrases will be found inclosed in brackets; it
being the editor’s most earnest desire to intrude nothing of himself
into the work, but to give to the public the words, as well as ideas,
of the real author.

What follows in the ensuing pages, is not a preface regularly drawn out
by the author, but merely hints for a preface, which, though never
filled up in the manner the writer intended, appeared to be worth
preserving.

W. GODWIN.




AUTHOR’S PREFACE


The wrongs of woman, like the wrongs of the oppressed part of mankind,
may be deemed necessary by their oppressors: but surely there are a
few, who will dare to advance before the improvement of the age, and
grant that my sketches are not the abortion of a distempered fancy, or
the strong delineations of a wounded heart.

In writing this novel, I have rather endeavoured to pourtray passions
than manners.

In many instances I could have made the incidents more dramatic, would
I have sacrificed my main object, the desire of exhibiting the misery
and oppression, peculiar to women, that arise out of the partial laws
and customs of society.

In the invention of the story, this view restrained my fancy; and the
history ought rather to be considered, as of woman, than of an
individual.

The sentiments I have embodied.

In many works of this species, the hero is allowed to be mortal, and to
become wise and virtuous as well as happy, by a train of events and
circumstances. The heroines, on the contrary, are to be born
immaculate, and to act like goddesses of wisdom, just come forth highly
finished Minervas from the head of Jove.

[The following is an extract of a letter from the author to a friend,
to whom she communicated her manuscript.]

For my part, I cannot suppose any situation more distressing, than for
a woman of sensibility, with an improving mind, to be bound to such a
man as I have described for life; obliged to renounce all the
humanizing affections, and to avoid cultivating her taste, lest her
perception of grace and refinement of sentiment, should sharpen to
agony the pangs of disappointment. Love, in which the imagination
mingles its bewitching colouring, must be fostered by delicacy. I
should despise, or rather call her an ordinary woman, who could endure
such a husband as I have sketched.

These appear to me (matrimonial despotism of heart and conduct) to be
the peculiar Wrongs of Woman, because they degrade the mind. What are
termed great misfortunes, may more forcibly impress the mind of common
readers; they have more of what may justly be termed stage-effect; but
it is the delineation of finer sensations, which, in my opinion,
constitutes the merit of our best novels. This is what I have in view;
and to show the wrongs of different classes of women, equally
oppressive, though, from the difference of education, necessarily
various.




CHAPTER 1


Abodes of horror have frequently been described, and castles, filled
with spectres and chimeras, conjured up by the magic spell of genius to
harrow the soul, and absorb the wondering mind. But, formed of such
stuff as dreams are made of, what were they to the mansion of despair,
in one corner of which Maria sat, endeavouring to recall her scattered
thoughts!

Surprise, astonishment, that bordered on distraction, seemed to have
suspended her faculties, till, waking by degrees to a keen sense of
anguish, a whirlwind of rage and indignation roused her torpid pulse.
One recollection with frightful velocity following another, threatened
to fire her brain, and make her a fit companion for the terrific
inhabitants, whose groans and shrieks were no unsubstantial sounds of
whistling winds, or startled birds, modulated by a romantic fancy,
which amuse while they affright; but such tones of misery as carry a
dreadful certainty directly to the heart. What effect must they then
have produced on one, true to the touch of sympathy, and tortured by
maternal apprehension!

Her infant’s image was continually floating on Maria’s sight, and the
first smile of intelligence remembered, as none but a mother, an
unhappy mother, can conceive. She heard her half speaking half cooing,
and felt the little twinkling fingers on her burning bosom—a bosom
bursting with the nutriment for which this cherished child might now be
pining in vain. From a stranger she could indeed receive the maternal
aliment, Maria was grieved at the thought—but who would watch her with
a mother’s tenderness, a mother’s self-denial?

The retreating shadows of former sorrows rushed back in a gloomy train,
and seemed to be pictured on the walls of her prison, magnified by the
state of mind in which they were viewed—Still she mourned for her
child, lamented she was a daughter, and anticipated the aggravated ills
of life that her sex rendered almost inevitable, even while dreading
she was no more. To think that she was blotted out of existence was
agony, when the imagination had been long employed to expand her
faculties; yet to suppose her turned adrift on an unknown sea, was
scarcely less afflicting.

After being two days the prey of impetuous, varying emotions, Maria
began to reflect more calmly on her present situation, for she had
actually been rendered incapable of sober reflection, by the discovery
of the act of atrocity of which she was the victim. She could not have
imagined, that, in all the fermentation of civilized depravity, a
similar plot could have entered a human mind. She had been stunned by
an unexpected blow; yet life, however joyless, was not to be indolently
resigned, or misery endured without exertion, and proudly termed
patience. She had hitherto meditated only to point the dart of anguish,
and suppressed the heart heavings of indignant nature merely by the
force of contempt. Now she endeavoured to brace her mind to fortitude,
and to ask herself what was to be her employment in her dreary cell?
Was it not to effect her escape, to fly to the succour of her child,
and to baffle the selfish schemes of her tyrant—her husband?

These thoughts roused her sleeping spirit, and the self-possession
returned, that seemed to have abandoned her in the infernal solitude
into which she had been precipitated. The first emotions of
overwhelming impatience began to subside, and resentment gave place to
tenderness, and more tranquil meditation; though anger once more stopt
the calm current of reflection when she attempted to move her manacled
arms. But this was an outrage that could only excite momentary feelings
of scorn, which evaporated in a faint smile; for Maria was far from
thinking a personal insult the most difficult to endure with
magnanimous indifference.

She approached the small grated window of her chamber, and for a
considerable time only regarded the blue expanse; though it commanded a
view of a desolate garden, and of part of a huge pile of buildings,
that, after having been suffered, for half a century, to fall to decay,
had undergone some clumsy repairs, merely to render it habitable. The
ivy had been torn off the turrets, and the stones not wanted to patch
up the breaches of time, and exclude the warring elements, left in
heaps in the disordered court. Maria contemplated this scene she knew
not how long; or rather gazed on the walls, and pondered on her
situation. To the master of this most horrid of prisons, she had, soon
after her entrance, raved of injustice, in accents that would have
justified his treatment, had not a malignant smile, when she appealed
to his judgment, with a dreadful conviction stifled her remonstrating
complaints. By force, or openly, what could be done? But surely some
expedient might occur to an active mind, without any other employment,
and possessed of sufficient resolution to put the risk of life into the
balance with the chance of freedom.

A woman entered in the midst of these reflections, with a firm,
deliberate step, strongly marked features, and large black eyes, which
she fixed steadily on Maria’s, as if she designed to intimidate her,
saying at the same time “You had better sit down and eat your dinner,
than look at the clouds.”

“I have no appetite,” replied Maria, who had previously determined to
speak mildly; “why then should I eat?”

“But, in spite of that, you must and shall eat something. I have had
many ladies under my care, who have resolved to starve themselves; but,
soon or late, they gave up their intent, as they recovered their
senses.”

“Do you really think me mad?” asked Maria, meeting the searching glance
of her eye.

“Not just now. But what does that prove?—Only that you must be the more
carefully watched, for appearing at times so reasonable. You have not
touched a morsel since you entered the house.”—Maria sighed
intelligibly.—“Could any thing but madness produce such a disgust for
food?”

“Yes, grief; you would not ask the question if you knew what it was.”
The attendant shook her head; and a ghastly smile of desperate
fortitude served as a forcible reply, and made Maria pause, before she
added—“Yet I will take some refreshment: I mean not to die.—No; I will
preserve my senses; and convince even you, sooner than you are aware
of, that my intellects have never been disturbed, though the exertion
of them may have been suspended by some infernal drug.”

Doubt gathered still thicker on the brow of her guard, as she attempted
to convict her of mistake.

“Have patience!” exclaimed Maria, with a solemnity that inspired awe.
“My God! how have I been schooled into the practice!” A suffocation of
voice betrayed the agonizing emotions she was labouring to keep down;
and conquering a qualm of disgust, she calmly endeavoured to eat enough
to prove her docility, perpetually turning to the suspicious female,
whose observation she courted, while she was making the bed and
adjusting the room.

“Come to me often,” said Maria, with a tone of persuasion, in
consequence of a vague plan that she had hastily adopted, when, after
surveying this woman’s form and features, she felt convinced that she
had an understanding above the common standard, “and believe me mad,
till you are obliged to acknowledge the contrary.” The woman was no
fool, that is, she was superior to her class; nor had misery quite
petrified the life’s-blood of humanity, to which reflections on our own
misfortunes only give a more orderly course. The manner, rather than
the expostulations, of Maria made a slight suspicion dart into her mind
with corresponding sympathy, which various other avocations, and the
habit of banishing compunction, prevented her, for the present, from
examining more minutely.

But when she was told that no person, excepting the physician appointed
by her family, was to be permitted to see the lady at the end of the
gallery, she opened her keen eyes still wider, and uttered a—“hem!”
before she enquired—“Why?” She was briefly told, in reply, that the
malady was hereditary, and the fits not occurring but at very long and
irregular intervals, she must be carefully watched; for the length of
these lucid periods only rendered her more mischievous, when any
vexation or caprice brought on the paroxysm of phrensy.

Had her master trusted her, it is probable that neither pity nor
curiosity would have made her swerve from the straight line of her
interest; for she had suffered too much in her intercourse with
mankind, not to determine to look for support, rather to humouring
their passions, than courting their approbation by the integrity of her
conduct. A deadly blight had met her at the very threshold of
existence; and the wretchedness of her mother seemed a heavy weight
fastened on her innocent neck, to drag her down to perdition. She could
not heroically determine to succour an unfortunate; but, offended at
the bare supposition that she could be deceived with the same ease as a
common servant, she no longer curbed her curiosity; and, though she
never seriously fathomed her own intentions, she would sit, every
moment she could steal from observation, listening to the tale, which
Maria was eager to relate with all the persuasive eloquence of grief.

It is so cheering to see a human face, even if little of the divinity
of virtue beam in it, that Maria anxiously expected the return of the
attendant, as of a gleam of light to break the gloom of idleness.
Indulged sorrow, she perceived, must blunt or sharpen the faculties to
the two opposite extremes; producing stupidity, the moping melancholy
of indolence; or the restless activity of a disturbed imagination. She
sunk into one state, after being fatigued by the other: till the want
of occupation became even more painful than the actual pressure or
apprehension of sorrow; and the confinement that froze her into a nook
of existence, with an unvaried prospect before her, the most
insupportable of evils. The lamp of life seemed to be spending itself
to chase the vapours of a dungeon which no art could dissipate.—And to
what purpose did she rally all her energy?—Was not the world a vast
prison, and women born slaves?

Though she failed immediately to rouse a lively sense of injustice in
the mind of her guard, because it had been sophisticated into
misanthropy, she touched her heart. Jemima (she had only a claim to a
Christian name, which had not procured her any Christian privileges)
could patiently hear of Maria’s confinement on false pretences; she had
felt the crushing hand of power, hardened by the exercise of injustice,
and ceased to wonder at the perversions of the understanding, which
systematize oppression; but, when told that her child, only four months
old, had been torn from her, even while she was discharging the
tenderest maternal office, the woman awoke in a bosom long estranged
from feminine emotions, and Jemima determined to alleviate all in her
power, without hazarding the loss of her place, the sufferings of a
wretched mother, apparently injured, and certainly unhappy. A sense of
right seems to result from the simplest act of reason, and to preside
over the faculties of the mind, like the master-sense of feeling, to
rectify the rest; but (for the comparison may be carried still farther)
how often is the exquisite sensibility of both weakened or destroyed by
the vulgar occupations, and ignoble pleasures of life?

The preserving her situation was, indeed, an important object to
Jemima, who had been hunted from hole to hole, as if she had been a
beast of prey, or infected with a moral plague. The wages she received,
the greater part of which she hoarded, as her only chance for
independence, were much more considerable than she could reckon on
obtaining any where else, were it possible that she, an outcast from
society, could be permitted to earn a subsistence in a reputable
family. Hearing Maria perpetually complain of listlessness, and the not
being able to beguile grief by resuming her customary pursuits, she was
easily prevailed on, by compassion, and that involuntary respect for
abilities, which those who possess them can never eradicate, to bring
her some books and implements for writing. Maria’s conversation had
amused and interested her, and the natural consequence was a desire,
scarcely observed by herself, of obtaining the esteem of a person she
admired. The remembrance of better days was rendered more lively; and
the sentiments then acquired appearing less romantic than they had for
a long period, a spark of hope roused her mind to new activity.

How grateful was her attention to Maria! Oppressed by a dead weight of
existence, or preyed on by the gnawing worm of discontent, with what
eagerness did she endeavour to shorten the long days, which left no
traces behind! She seemed to be sailing on the vast ocean of life,
without seeing any land-mark to indicate the progress of time; to find
employment was then to find variety, the animating principle of nature.




CHAPTER 2


Earnestly as Maria endeavoured to soothe, by reading, the anguish of
her wounded mind, her thoughts would often wander from the subject she
was led to discuss, and tears of maternal tenderness obscured the
reasoning page. She descanted on “the ills which flesh is heir to,”
with bitterness, when the recollection of her babe was revived by a
tale of fictitious woe, that bore any resemblance to her own; and her
imagination was continually employed, to conjure up and embody the
various phantoms of misery, which folly and vice had let loose on the
world. The loss of her babe was the tender string; against other cruel
remembrances she laboured to steel her bosom; and even a ray of hope,
in the midst of her gloomy reveries, would sometimes gleam on the dark
horizon of futurity, while persuading herself that she ought to cease
to hope, since happiness was no where to be found.—But of her child,
debilitated by the grief with which its mother had been assailed before
it saw the light, she could not think without an impatient struggle.

“I, alone, by my active tenderness, could have saved,” she would
exclaim, “from an early blight, this sweet blossom; and, cherishing it,
I should have had something still to love.”

In proportion as other expectations were torn from her, this tender one
had been fondly clung to, and knit into her heart.

The books she had obtained, were soon devoured, by one who had no other
resource to escape from sorrow, and the feverish dreams of ideal
wretchedness or felicity, which equally weaken the intoxicated
sensibility. Writing was then the only alternative, and she wrote some
rhapsodies descriptive of the state of her mind; but the events of her
past life pressing on her, she resolved circumstantially to relate
them, with the sentiments that experience, and more matured reason,
would naturally suggest. They might perhaps instruct her daughter, and
shield her from the misery, the tyranny, her mother knew not how to
avoid.

This thought gave life to her diction, her soul flowed into it, and she
soon found the task of recollecting almost obliterated impressions very
interesting. She lived again in the revived emotions of youth, and
forgot her present in the retrospect of sorrows that had assumed an
unalterable character.

Though this employment lightened the weight of time, yet, never losing
sight of her main object, Maria did not allow any opportunity to slip
of winning on the affections of Jemima; for she discovered in her a
strength of mind, that excited her esteem, clouded as it was by the
misanthropy of despair.

An insulated being, from the misfortune of her birth, she despised and
preyed on the society by which she had been oppressed, and loved not
her fellow-creatures, because she had never been beloved. No mother had
ever fondled her, no father or brother had protected her from outrage;
and the man who had plunged her into infamy, and deserted her when she
stood in greatest need of support, deigned not to smooth with kindness
the road to ruin. Thus degraded, was she let loose on the world; and
virtue, never nurtured by affection, assumed the stern aspect of
selfish independence.

This general view of her life, Maria gathered from her exclamations and
dry remarks. Jemima indeed displayed a strange mixture of interest and
suspicion; for she would listen to her with earnestness, and then
suddenly interrupt the conversation, as if afraid of resigning, by
giving way to her sympathy, her dear-bought knowledge of the world.

Maria alluded to the possibility of an escape, and mentioned a
compensation, or reward; but the style in which she was repulsed made
her cautious, and determine not to renew the subject, till she knew
more of the character she had to work on. Jemima’s countenance, and
dark hints, seemed to say, “You are an extraordinary woman; but let me
consider, this may only be one of your lucid intervals.” Nay, the very
energy of Maria’s character, made her suspect that the extraordinary
animation she perceived might be the effect of madness. “Should her
husband then substantiate his charge, and get possession of her estate,
from whence would come the promised annuity, or more desired
protection? Besides, might not a woman, anxious to escape, conceal some
of the circumstances which made against her? Was truth to be expected
from one who had been entrapped, kidnapped, in the most fraudulent
manner?”

In this train Jemima continued to argue, the moment after compassion
and respect seemed to make her swerve; and she still resolved not to be
wrought on to do more than soften the rigour of confinement, till she
could advance on surer ground.

Maria was not permitted to walk in the garden; but sometimes, from her
window, she turned her eyes from the gloomy walls, in which she pined
life away, on the poor wretches who strayed along the walks, and
contemplated the most terrific of ruins—that of a human soul. What is
the view of the fallen column, the mouldering arch, of the most
exquisite workmanship, when compared with this living memento of the
fragility, the instability, of reason, and the wild luxuriancy of
noxious passions? Enthusiasm turned adrift, like some rich stream
overflowing its banks, rushes forward with destructive velocity,
inspiring a sublime concentration of thought. Thus thought Maria—These
are the ravages over which humanity must ever mournfully ponder, with a
degree of anguish not excited by crumbling marble, or cankering brass,
unfaithful to the trust of monumental fame. It is not over the decaying
productions of the mind, embodied with the happiest art, we grieve most
bitterly. The view of what has been done by man, produces a melancholy,
yet aggrandizing, sense of what remains to be achieved by human
intellect; but a mental convulsion, which, like the devastation of an
earthquake, throws all the elements of thought and imagination into
confusion, makes contemplation giddy, and we fearfully ask on what
ground we ourselves stand.

Melancholy and imbecility marked the features of the wretches allowed
to breathe at large; for the frantic, those who in a strong imagination
had lost a sense of woe, were closely confined. The playful tricks and
mischievous devices of their disturbed fancy, that suddenly broke out,
could not be guarded against, when they were permitted to enjoy any
portion of freedom; for, so active was their imagination, that every
new object which accidentally struck their senses, awoke to phrenzy
their restless passions; as Maria learned from the burden of their
incessant ravings.

Sometimes, with a strict injunction of silence, Jemima would allow
Maria, at the close of evening, to stray along the narrow avenues that
separated the dungeon-like apartments, leaning on her arm. What a
change of scene! Maria wished to pass the threshold of her prison, yet,
when by chance she met the eye of rage glaring on her, yet unfaithful
to its office, she shrunk back with more horror and affright, than if
she had stumbled over a mangled corpse. Her busy fancy pictured the
misery of a fond heart, watching over a friend thus estranged, absent,
though present—over a poor wretch lost to reason and the social joys of
existence; and losing all consciousness of misery in its excess. What a
task, to watch the light of reason quivering in the eye, or with
agonizing expectation to catch the beam of recollection; tantalized by
hope, only to feel despair more keenly, at finding a much loved face or
voice, suddenly remembered, or pathetically implored, only to be
immediately forgotten, or viewed with indifference or abhorrence!

The heart-rending sigh of melancholy sunk into her soul; and when she
retired to rest, the petrified figures she had encountered, the only
human forms she was doomed to observe, haunting her dreams with tales
of mysterious wrongs, made her wish to sleep to dream no more.

Day after day rolled away, and tedious as the present moment appeared,
they passed in such an unvaried tenor, Maria was surprised to find that
she had already been six weeks buried alive, and yet had such faint
hopes of effecting her enlargement. She was, earnestly as she had
sought for employment, now angry with herself for having been amused by
writing her narrative; and grieved to think that she had for an instant
thought of any thing, but contriving to escape.

Jemima had evidently pleasure in her society: still, though she often
left her with a glow of kindness, she returned with the same chilling
air; and, when her heart appeared for a moment to open, some suggestion
of reason forcibly closed it, before she could give utterance to the
confidence Maria’s conversation inspired.

Discouraged by these changes, Maria relapsed into despondency, when she
was cheered by the alacrity with which Jemima brought her a fresh
parcel of books; assuring her, that she had taken some pains to obtain
them from one of the keepers, who attended a gentleman confined in the
opposite corner of the gallery.

Maria took up the books with emotion. “They come,” said she, “perhaps,
from a wretch condemned, like me, to reason on the nature of madness,
by having wrecked minds continually under his eye; and almost to wish
himself—as I do—mad, to escape from the contemplation of it.” Her heart
throbbed with sympathetic alarm; and she turned over the leaves with
awe, as if they had become sacred from passing through the hands of an
unfortunate being, oppressed by a similar fate.

Dryden’s Fables, Milton’s Paradise Lost, with several modern
productions, composed the collection. It was a mine of treasure. Some
marginal notes, in Dryden’s Fables, caught her attention: they were
written with force and taste; and, in one of the modern pamphlets,
there was a fragment left, containing various observations on the
present state of society and government, with a comparative view of the
politics of Europe and America. These remarks were written with a
degree of generous warmth, when alluding to the enslaved state of the
labouring majority, perfectly in unison with Maria’s mode of thinking.

She read them over and over again; and fancy, treacherous fancy, began
to sketch a character, congenial with her own, from these shadowy
outlines.—“Was he mad?” She reperused the marginal notes, and they
seemed the production of an animated, but not of a disturbed
imagination. Confined to this speculation, every time she re-read them,
some fresh refinement of sentiment, or acuteness of thought impressed
her, which she was astonished at herself for not having before
observed.

What a creative power has an affectionate heart! There are beings who
cannot live without loving, as poets love; and who feel the electric
spark of genius, wherever it awakens sentiment or grace. Maria had
often thought, when disciplining her wayward heart, “that to charm, was
to be virtuous.” “They who make me wish to appear the most amiable and
good in their eyes, must possess in a degree,” she would exclaim, “the
graces and virtues they call into action.”

She took up a book on the powers of the human mind; but, her attention
strayed from cold arguments on the nature of what she felt, while she
was feeling, and she snapt the chain of the theory to read Dryden’s
Guiscard and Sigismunda.

Maria, in the course of the ensuing day, returned some of the books,
with the hope of getting others—and more marginal notes. Thus shut out
from human intercourse, and compelled to view nothing but the prison of
vexed spirits, to meet a wretch in the same situation, was more surely
to find a friend, than to imagine a countryman one, in a strange land,
where the human voice conveys no information to the eager ear.

“Did you ever see the unfortunate being to whom these books belong?”
asked Maria, when Jemima brought her slipper. “Yes. He sometimes walks
out, between five and six, before the family is stirring, in the
morning, with two keepers; but even then his hands are confined.”

“What! is he so unruly?” enquired Maria, with an accent of
disappointment.

“No, not that I perceive,” replied Jemima; “but he has an untamed look,
a vehemence of eye, that excites apprehension. Were his hands free, he
looks as if he could soon manage both his guards: yet he appears
tranquil.”

“If he be so strong, he must be young,” observed Maria.

“Three or four and thirty, I suppose; but there is no judging of a
person in his situation.”

“Are you sure that he is mad?” interrupted Maria with eagerness. Jemima
quitted the room, without replying.

“No, no, he certainly is not!” exclaimed Maria, answering herself; “the
man who could write those observations was not disordered in his
intellects.”

She sat musing, gazing at the moon, and watching its motion as it
seemed to glide under the clouds. Then, preparing for bed, she thought,
“Of what use could I be to him, or he to me, if it be true that he is
unjustly confined?—Could he aid me to escape, who is himself more
closely watched?—Still I should like to see him.” She went to bed,
dreamed of her child, yet woke exactly at half after five o’clock, and
starting up, only wrapped a gown around her, and ran to the window. The
morning was chill, it was the latter end of September; yet she did not
retire to warm herself and think in bed, till the sound of the
servants, moving about the house, convinced her that the unknown would
not walk in the garden that morning. She was ashamed at feeling
disappointed; and began to reflect, as an excuse to herself, on the
little objects which attract attention when there is nothing to divert
the mind; and how difficult it was for women to avoid growing romantic,
who have no active duties or pursuits.

At breakfast, Jemima enquired whether she understood French? for,
unless she did, the stranger’s stock of books was exhausted. Maria
replied in the affirmative; but forbore to ask any more questions
respecting the person to whom they belonged. And Jemima gave her a new
subject for contemplation, by describing the person of a lovely maniac,
just brought into an adjoining chamber. She was singing the pathetic
ballad of old Rob[3] with the most heart-melting falls and pauses.
Jemima had half-opened the door, when she distinguished her voice, and
Maria stood close to it, scarcely daring to respire, lest a modulation
should escape her, so exquisitely sweet, so passionately wild. She
began with sympathy to pourtray to herself another victim, when the
lovely warbler flew, as it were, from the spray, and a torrent of
unconnected exclamations and questions burst from her, interrupted by
fits of laughter, so horrid, that Maria shut the door, and, turning her
eyes up to heaven, exclaimed—“Gracious God!”

 [3] A blank space about ten characters in length occurs here in the
 original edition [Publisher’s note].


Several minutes elapsed before Maria could enquire respecting the
rumour of the house (for this poor wretch was obviously not confined
without a cause); and then Jemima could only tell her, that it was
said, “she had been married, against her inclination, to a rich old
man, extremely jealous (no wonder, for she was a charming creature);
and that, in consequence of his treatment, or something which hung on
her mind, she had, during her first lying-in, lost her senses.”

What a subject of meditation—even to the very confines of madness.

“Woman, fragile flower! why were you suffered to adorn a world exposed
to the inroad of such stormy elements?” thought Maria, while the poor
maniac’s strain was still breathing on her ear, and sinking into her
very soul.

Towards the evening, Jemima brought her Rousseau’s Heloise; and she sat
reading with eyes and heart, till the return of her guard to extinguish
the light. One instance of her kindness was, the permitting Maria to
have one, till her own hour of retiring to rest. She had read this work
long since; but now it seemed to open a new world to her—the only one
worth inhabiting. Sleep was not to be wooed; yet, far from being
fatigued by the restless rotation of thought, she rose and opened her
window, just as the thin watery clouds of twilight made the long silent
shadows visible. The air swept across her face with a voluptuous
freshness that thrilled to her heart, awakening indefinable emotions;
and the sound of a waving branch, or the twittering of a startled bird,
alone broke the stillness of reposing nature. Absorbed by the sublime
sensibility which renders the consciousness of existence felicity,
Maria was happy, till an autumnal scent, wafted by the breeze of morn
from the fallen leaves of the adjacent wood, made her recollect that
the season had changed since her confinement; yet life afforded no
variety to solace an afflicted heart. She returned dispirited to her
couch, and thought of her child till the broad glare of day again
invited her to the window. She looked not for the unknown, still how
great was her vexation at perceiving the back of a man, certainly he,
with his two attendants, as he turned into a side-path which led to the
house! A confused recollection of having seen somebody who resembled
him, immediately occurred, to puzzle and torment her with endless
conjectures. Five minutes sooner, and she should have seen his face,
and been out of suspense—was ever any thing so unlucky! His steady,
bold step, and the whole air of his person, bursting as it were from a
cloud, pleased her, and gave an outline to the imagination to sketch
the individual form she wished to recognize.

Feeling the disappointment more severely than she was willing to
believe, she flew to Rousseau, as her only refuge from the idea of him,
who might prove a friend, could she but find a way to interest him in
her fate; still the personification of Saint Preux, or of an ideal
lover far superior, was after this imperfect model, of which merely a
glance had been caught, even to the minutiae of the coat and hat of the
stranger. But if she lent St. Preux, or the demi-god of her fancy, his
form, she richly repaid him by the donation of all St. Preux’s
sentiments and feelings, culled to gratify her own, to which he seemed
to have an undoubted right, when she read on the margin of an
impassioned letter, written in the well-known hand—“Rousseau alone, the
true Prometheus of sentiment, possessed the fire of genius necessary to
pourtray the passion, the truth of which goes so directly to the
heart.”

Maria was again true to the hour, yet had finished Rousseau, and begun
to transcribe some selected passages; unable to quit either the author
or the window, before she had a glimpse of the countenance she daily
longed to see; and, when seen, it conveyed no distinct idea to her mind
where she had seen it before. He must have been a transient
acquaintance; but to discover an acquaintance was fortunate, could she
contrive to attract his attention, and excite his sympathy.

Every glance afforded colouring for the picture she was delineating on
her heart; and once, when the window was half open, the sound of his
voice reached her. Conviction flashed on her; she had certainly, in a
moment of distress, heard the same accents. They were manly, and
characteristic of a noble mind; nay, even sweet—or sweet they seemed to
her attentive ear.

She started back, trembling, alarmed at the emotion a strange
coincidence of circumstances inspired, and wondering why she thought so
much of a stranger, obliged as she had been by his timely interference;
[for she recollected, by degrees all the circumstances of their former
meeting.] She found however that she could think of nothing else; or,
if she thought of her daughter, it was to wish that she had a father
whom her mother could respect and love.




CHAPTER 3


When perusing the first parcel of books, Maria had, with her pencil,
written in one of them a few exclamations, expressive of compassion and
sympathy, which she scarcely remembered, till turning over the leaves
of one of the volumes, lately brought to her, a slip of paper dropped
out, which Jemima hastily snatched up.

“Let me see it,” demanded Maria impatiently, “You surely are not afraid
of trusting me with the effusions of a madman?” “I must consider,”
replied Jemima; and withdrew, with the paper in her hand.

In a life of such seclusion, the passions gain undue force; Maria
therefore felt a great degree of resentment and vexation, which she had
not time to subdue, before Jemima, returning, delivered the paper.


“Whoever you are, who partake of my fate, accept my sincere
commiseration—I would have said protection; but the privilege of man is
denied me.

“My own situation forces a dreadful suspicion on my mind—I may not
always languish in vain for freedom—say are you—I cannot ask the
question; yet I will remember you when my remembrance can be of any
use. I will enquire, why you are so mysteriously detained—and I will
have an answer.


“HENRY DARNFORD.”


By the most pressing intreaties, Maria prevailed on Jemima to permit
her to write a reply to this note. Another and another succeeded, in
which explanations were not allowed relative to their present
situation; but Maria, with sufficient explicitness, alluded to a former
obligation; and they insensibly entered on an interchange of sentiments
on the most important subjects. To write these letters was the business
of the day, and to receive them the moment of sunshine. By some means,
Darnford having discovered Maria’s window, when she next appeared at
it, he made her, behind his keepers, a profound bow of respect and
recognition.

Two or three weeks glided away in this kind of intercourse, during
which period Jemima, to whom Maria had given the necessary information
respecting her family, had evidently gained some intelligence, which
increased her desire of pleasing her charge, though she could not yet
determine to liberate her. Maria took advantage of this favourable
charge, without too minutely enquiring into the cause; and such was her
eagerness to hold human converse, and to see her former protector,
still a stranger to her, that she incessantly requested her guard to
gratify her more than curiosity.

Writing to Darnford, she was led from the sad objects before her, and
frequently rendered insensible to the horrid noises around her, which
previously had continually employed her feverish fancy. Thinking it
selfish to dwell on her own sufferings, when in the midst of wretches,
who had not only lost all that endears life, but their very selves, her
imagination was occupied with melancholy earnestness to trace the mazes
of misery, through which so many wretches must have passed to this
gloomy receptacle of disjointed souls, to the grand source of human
corruption. Often at midnight was she waked by the dismal shrieks of
demoniac rage, or of excruciating despair, uttered in such wild tones
of indescribable anguish as proved the total absence of reason, and
roused phantoms of horror in her mind, far more terrific than all that
dreaming superstition ever drew. Besides, there was frequently
something so inconceivably picturesque in the varying gestures of
unrestrained passion, so irresistibly comic in their sallies, or so
heart-piercingly pathetic in the little airs they would sing,
frequently bursting out after an awful silence, as to fascinate the
attention, and amuse the fancy, while torturing the soul. It was the
uproar of the passions which she was compelled to observe; and to mark
the lucid beam of reason, like a light trembling in a socket, or like
the flash which divides the threatening clouds of angry heaven only to
display the horrors which darkness shrouded.

Jemima would labour to beguile the tedious evenings, by describing the
persons and manners of the unfortunate beings, whose figures or voices
awoke sympathetic sorrow in Maria’s bosom; and the stories she told
were the more interesting, for perpetually leaving room to conjecture
something extraordinary. Still Maria, accustomed to generalize her
observations, was led to conclude from all she heard, that it was a
vulgar error to suppose that people of abilities were the most apt to
lose the command of reason. On the contrary, from most of the instances
she could investigate, she thought it resulted, that the passions only
appeared strong and disproportioned, because the judgment was weak and
unexercised; and that they gained strength by the decay of reason, as
the shadows lengthen during the sun’s decline.

Maria impatiently wished to see her fellow-sufferer; but Darnford was
still more earnest to obtain an interview. Accustomed to submit to
every impulse of passion, and never taught, like women, to restrain the
most natural, and acquire, instead of the bewitching frankness of
nature, a factitious propriety of behaviour, every desire became a
torrent that bore down all opposition.

His travelling trunk, which contained the books lent to Maria, had been
sent to him, and with a part of its contents he bribed his principal
keeper; who, after receiving the most solemn promise that he would
return to his apartment without attempting to explore any part of the
house, conducted him, in the dusk of the evening, to Maria’s room.

Jemima had apprized her charge of the visit, and she expected with
trembling impatience, inspired by a vague hope that he might again
prove her deliverer, to see a man who had before rescued her from
oppression. He entered with an animation of countenance, formed to
captivate an enthusiast; and, hastily turned his eyes from her to the
apartment, which he surveyed with apparent emotions of compassionate
indignation. Sympathy illuminated his eye, and, taking her hand, he
respectfully bowed on it, exclaiming—“This is extraordinary!—again to
meet you, and in such circumstances!” Still, impressive as was the
coincidence of events which brought them once more together, their full
hearts did not overflow.—[4]

 [4] The copy which had received the author’s last corrections breaks
 off in this place, and the pages which follow, to the end of Chap. IV,
 are printed from a copy in a less finished state. [Godwin’s note]


[And though, after this first visit, they were permitted frequently to
repeat their interviews, they were for some time employed in] a
reserved conversation, to which all the world might have listened;
excepting, when discussing some literary subject, flashes of sentiment,
inforced by each relaxing feature, seemed to remind them that their
minds were already acquainted.

[By degrees, Darnford entered into the particulars of his story.] In a
few words, he informed her that he had been a thoughtless, extravagant
young man; yet, as he described his faults, they appeared to be the
generous luxuriancy of a noble mind. Nothing like meanness tarnished
the lustre of his youth, nor had the worm of selfishness lurked in the
unfolding bud, even while he had been the dupe of others. Yet he
tardily acquired the experience necessary to guard him against future
imposition.

“I shall weary you,” continued he, “by my egotism; and did not powerful
emotions draw me to you,”—his eyes glistened as he spoke, and a
trembling seemed to run through his manly frame,—“I would not waste
these precious moments in talking of myself.

“My father and mother were people of fashion; married by their parents.
He was fond of the turf, she of the card-table. I, and two or three
other children since dead, were kept at home till we became
intolerable. My father and mother had a visible dislike to each other,
continually displayed; the servants were of the depraved kind usually
found in the houses of people of fortune. My brothers and parents all
dying, I was left to the care of guardians; and sent to Eton. I never
knew the sweets of domestic affection, but I felt the want of
indulgence and frivolous respect at school. I will not disgust you with
a recital of the vices of my youth, which can scarcely be comprehended
by female delicacy. I was taught to love by a creature I am ashamed to
mention; and the other women with whom I afterwards became intimate,
were of a class of which you can have no knowledge. I formed my
acquaintance with them at the theaters; and, when vivacity danced in
their eyes, I was not easily disgusted by the vulgarity which flowed
from their lips. Having spent, a few years after I was of age, [the
whole of] a considerable patrimony, excepting a few hundreds, I had no
resource but to purchase a commission in a new-raised regiment,
destined to subjugate America. The regret I felt to renounce a life of
pleasure, was counter-balanced by the curiosity I had to see America,
or rather to travel; [nor had any of those circumstances occurred to my
youth, which might have been calculated] to bind my country to my
heart. I shall not trouble you with the details of a military life. My
blood was still kept in motion; till, towards the close of the contest,
I was wounded and taken prisoner.

“Confined to my bed, or chair, by a lingering cure, my only refuge from
the preying activity of my mind, was books, which I read with great
avidity, profiting by the conversation of my host, a man of sound
understanding. My political sentiments now underwent a total change;
and, dazzled by the hospitality of the Americans, I determined to take
up my abode with freedom. I, therefore, with my usual impetuosity, sold
my commission, and travelled into the interior parts of the country, to
lay out my money to advantage. Added to this, I did not much like the
puritanical manners of the large towns. Inequality of condition was
there most disgustingly galling. The only pleasure wealth afforded, was
to make an ostentatious display of it; for the cultivation of the fine
arts, or literature, had not introduced into the first circles that
polish of manners which renders the rich so essentially superior to the
poor in Europe. Added to this, an influx of vices had been let in by
the Revolution, and the most rigid principles of religion shaken to the
centre, before the understanding could be gradually emancipated from
the prejudices which led their ancestors undauntedly to seek an
inhospitable clime and unbroken soil. The resolution, that led them, in
pursuit of independence, to embark on rivers like seas, to search for
unknown shores, and to sleep under the hovering mists of endless
forests, whose baleful damps agued their limbs, was now turned into
commercial speculations, till the national character exhibited a
phenomenon in the history of the human mind—a head enthusiastically
enterprising, with cold selfishness of heart. And woman, lovely
woman!—they charm everywhere—still there is a degree of prudery, and a
want of taste and ease in the manners of the American women, that
renders them, in spite of their roses and lilies, far inferior to our
European charmers. In the country, they have often a bewitching
simplicity of character; but, in the cities, they have all the airs and
ignorance of the ladies who give the tone to the circles of the large
trading towns in England. They are fond of their ornaments, merely
because they are good, and not because they embellish their persons;
and are more gratified to inspire the women with jealousy of these
exterior advantages, than the men with love. All the frivolity which
often (excuse me, Madam) renders the society of modest women so stupid
in England, here seemed to throw still more leaden fetters on their
charms. Not being an adept in gallantry, I found that I could only keep
myself awake in their company by making downright love to them.

“But, not to intrude on your patience, I retired to the track of land
which I had purchased in the country, and my time passed pleasantly
enough while I cut down the trees, built my house, and planted my
different crops. But winter and idleness came, and I longed for more
elegant society, to hear what was passing in the world, and to do
something better than vegetate with the animals that made a very
considerable part of my household. Consequently, I determined to
travel. Motion was a substitute for variety of objects; and, passing
over immense tracks of country, I exhausted my exuberant spirits,
without obtaining much experience. I every where saw industry the
fore-runner and not the consequence, of luxury; but this country,
everything being on an ample scale, did not afford those picturesque
views, which a certain degree of cultivation is necessary gradually to
produce. The eye wandered without an object to fix upon over
immeasureable plains, and lakes that seemed replenished by the ocean,
whilst eternal forests of small clustering trees, obstructed the
circulation of air, and embarrassed the path, without gratifying the
eye of taste. No cottage smiling in the waste, no travellers hailed us,
to give life to silent nature; or, if perchance we saw the print of a
footstep in our path, it was a dreadful warning to turn aside; and the
head ached as if assailed by the scalping knife. The Indians who
hovered on the skirts of the European settlements had only learned of
their neighbours to plunder, and they stole their guns from them to do
it with more safety.

“From the woods and back settlements, I returned to the towns, and
learned to eat and drink most valiantly; but without entering into
commerce (and I detested commerce) I found I could not live there; and,
growing heartily weary of the land of liberty and vulgar aristocracy,
seated on her bags of dollars, I resolved once more to visit Europe. I
wrote to a distant relation in England, with whom I had been educated,
mentioning the vessel in which I intended to sail. Arriving in London,
my senses were intoxicated. I ran from street to street, from theater
to theater, and the women of the town (again I must beg pardon for my
habitual frankness) appeared to me like angels.

“A week was spent in this thoughtless manner, when, returning very late
to the hotel in which I had lodged ever since my arrival, I was knocked
down in a private street, and hurried, in a state of insensibility,
into a coach, which brought me hither, and I only recovered my senses
to be treated like one who had lost them. My keepers are deaf to my
remonstrances and enquiries, yet assure me that my confinement shall
not last long. Still I cannot guess, though I weary myself with
conjectures, why I am confined, or in what part of England this house
is situated. I imagine sometimes that I hear the sea roar, and wished
myself again on the Atlantic, till I had a glimpse of you.”[5]

 [5] The introduction of Darnford as the deliverer of Maria in a former
 instance, appears to have been an after-thought of the author. This
 has occasioned the omission of any allusion to that circumstance in
 the preceding narration. EDITOR. [Godwin’s note]


A few moments were only allowed to Maria to comment on this narrative,
when Darnford left her to her own thoughts, to the “never ending, still
beginning,” task of weighing his words, recollecting his tones of
voice, and feeling them reverberate on her heart.




CHAPTER 4


Pity, and the forlorn seriousness of adversity, have both been
considered as dispositions favourable to love, while satirical writers
have attributed the propensity to the relaxing effect of idleness; what
chance then had Maria of escaping, when pity, sorrow, and solitude all
conspired to soften her mind, and nourish romantic wishes, and, from a
natural progress, romantic expectations?

Maria was six-and-twenty. But, such was the native soundness of her
constitution, that time had only given to her countenance the character
of her mind. Revolving thought, and exercised affections had banished
some of the playful graces of innocence, producing insensibly that
irregularity of features which the struggles of the understanding to
trace or govern the strong emotions of the heart, are wont to imprint
on the yielding mass. Grief and care had mellowed, without obscuring,
the bright tints of youth, and the thoughtfulness which resided on her
brow did not take from the feminine softness of her features; nay, such
was the sensibility which often mantled over it, that she frequently
appeared, like a large proportion of her sex, only born to feel; and
the activity of her well-proportioned, and even almost voluptuous
figure, inspired the idea of strength of mind, rather than of body.
There was a simplicity sometimes indeed in her manner, which bordered
on infantine ingenuousness, that led people of common discernment to
underrate her talents, and smile at the flights of her imagination. But
those who could not comprehend the delicacy of her sentiments, were
attached by her unfailing sympathy, so that she was very generally
beloved by characters of very different descriptions; still, she was
too much under the influence of an ardent imagination to adhere to
common rules.

There are mistakes of conduct which at five-and-twenty prove the
strength of the mind, that, ten or fifteen years after, would
demonstrate its weakness, its incapacity to acquire a sane judgment.
The youths who are satisfied with the ordinary pleasures of life, and
do not sigh after ideal phantoms of love and friendship, will never
arrive at great maturity of understanding; but if these reveries are
cherished, as is too frequently the case with women, when experience
ought to have taught them in what human happiness consists, they become
as useless as they are wretched. Besides, their pains and pleasures are
so dependent on outward circumstances, on the objects of their
affections, that they seldom act from the impulse of a nerved mind,
able to choose its own pursuit.

Having had to struggle incessantly with the vices of mankind, Maria’s
imagination found repose in pourtraying the possible virtues the world
might contain. Pygmalion formed an ivory maid, and longed for an
informing soul. She, on the contrary, combined all the qualities of a
hero’s mind, and fate presented a statue in which she might enshrine
them.

We mean not to trace the progress of this passion, or recount how often
Darnford and Maria were obliged to part in the midst of an interesting
conversation. Jemima ever watched on the tip-toe of fear, and
frequently separated them on a false alarm, when they would have given
worlds to remain a little longer together.

A magic lamp now seemed to be suspended in Maria’s prison, and fairy
landscapes flitted round the gloomy walls, late so blank. Rushing from
the depth of despair, on the seraph wing of hope, she found herself
happy.—She was beloved, and every emotion was rapturous.

To Darnford she had not shown a decided affection; the fear of
outrunning his, a sure proof of love, made her often assume a coldness
and indifference foreign from her character; and, even when giving way
to the playful emotions of a heart just loosened from the frozen bond
of grief, there was a delicacy in her manner of expressing her
sensibility, which made him doubt whether it was the effect of love.

One evening, when Jemima left them, to listen to the sound of a distant
footstep, which seemed cautiously to approach, he seized Maria’s
hand—it was not withdrawn. They conversed with earnestness of their
situation; and, during the conversation, he once or twice gently drew
her towards him. He felt the fragrance of her breath, and longed, yet
feared, to touch the lips from which it issued; spirits of purity
seemed to guard them, while all the enchanting graces of love sported
on her cheeks, and languished in her eyes.

Jemima entering, he reflected on his diffidence with poignant regret,
and, she once more taking alarm, he ventured, as Maria stood near his
chair, to approach her lips with a declaration of love. She drew back
with solemnity, he hung down his head abashed; but lifting his eyes
timidly, they met her’s; she had determined, during that instant, and
suffered their rays to mingle. He took, with more ardour, reassured, a
half-consenting, half-reluctant kiss, reluctant only from modesty; and
there was a sacredness in her dignified manner of reclining her glowing
face on his shoulder, that powerfully impressed him. Desire was lost in
more ineffable emotions, and to protect her from insult and sorrow—to
make her happy, seemed not only the first wish of his heart, but the
most noble duty of his life. Such angelic confidence demanded the
fidelity of honour; but could he, feeling her in every pulsation, could
he ever change, could he be a villain? The emotion with which she, for
a moment, allowed herself to be pressed to his bosom, the tear of
rapturous sympathy, mingled with a soft melancholy sentiment of
recollected disappointment, said—more of truth and faithfulness, than
the tongue could have given utterance to in hours! They were silent—yet
discoursed, how eloquently? till, after a moment’s reflection, Maria
drew her chair by the side of his, and, with a composed sweetness of
voice, and supernatural benignity of countenance, said, “I must open my
whole heart to you; you must be told who I am, why I am here, and why,
telling you I am a wife, I blush not to”—the blush spoke the rest.

Jemima was again at her elbow, and the restraint of her presence did
not prevent an animated conversation, in which love, sly urchin, was
ever at bo-peep.

So much of heaven did they enjoy, that paradise bloomed around them; or
they, by a powerful spell, had been transported into Armida’s garden.
Love, the grand enchanter, “lapt them in Elysium,” and every sense was
harmonized to joy and social extacy. So animated, indeed, were their
accents of tenderness, in discussing what, in other circumstances,
would have been commonplace subjects, that Jemima felt, with surprise,
a tear of pleasure trickling down her rugged cheeks. She wiped it away,
half ashamed; and when Maria kindly enquired the cause, with all the
eager solicitude of a happy being wishing to impart to all nature its
overflowing felicity, Jemima owned that it was the first tear that
social enjoyment had ever drawn from her. She seemed indeed to breathe
more freely; the cloud of suspicion cleared away from her brow; she
felt herself, for once in her life, treated like a fellow-creature.

Imagination! who can paint thy power; or reflect the evanescent tints
of hope fostered by thee? A despondent gloom had long obscured Maria’s
horizon—now the sun broke forth, the rainbow appeared, and every
prospect was fair. Horror still reigned in the darkened cells,
suspicion lurked in the passages, and whispered along the walls. The
yells of men possessed, sometimes, made them pause, and wonder that
they felt so happy, in a tomb of living death. They even chid
themselves for such apparent insensibility; still the world contained
not three happier beings. And Jemima, after again patrolling the
passage, was so softened by the air of confidence which breathed around
her, that she voluntarily began an account of herself.




CHAPTER 5


“My father,” said Jemima, “seduced my mother, a pretty girl, with whom
he lived fellow-servant; and she no sooner perceived the natural, the
dreaded consequence, than the terrible conviction flashed on her—that
she was ruined. Honesty, and a regard for her reputation, had been the
only principles inculcated by her mother; and they had been so forcibly
impressed, that she feared shame, more than the poverty to which it
would lead. Her incessant importunities to prevail upon my father to
screen her from reproach by marrying her, as he had promised in the
fervour of seduction, estranged him from her so completely, that her
very person became distasteful to him; and he began to hate, as well as
despise me, before I was born.

“My mother, grieved to the soul by his neglect, and unkind treatment,
actually resolved to famish herself; and injured her health by the
attempt; though she had not sufficient resolution to adhere to her
project, or renounce it entirely. Death came not at her call; yet
sorrow, and the methods she adopted to conceal her condition, still
doing the work of a house-maid, had such an effect on her constitution,
that she died in the wretched garret, where her virtuous mistress had
forced her to take refuge in the very pangs of labour, though my
father, after a slight reproof, was allowed to remain in his
place—allowed by the mother of six children, who, scarcely permitting a
footstep to be heard, during her month’s indulgence, felt no sympathy
for the poor wretch, denied every comfort required by her situation.

“The day my mother, died, the ninth after my birth, I was consigned to
the care of the cheapest nurse my father could find; who suckled her
own child at the same time, and lodged as many more as she could get,
in two cellar-like apartments.

“Poverty, and the habit of seeing children die off her hands, had so
hardened her heart, that the office of a mother did not awaken the
tenderness of a woman; nor were the feminine caresses which seem a part
of the rearing of a child, ever bestowed on me. The chicken has a wing
to shelter under; but I had no bosom to nestle in, no kindred warmth to
foster me. Left in dirt, to cry with cold and hunger till I was weary,
and sleep without ever being prepared by exercise, or lulled by
kindness to rest; could I be expected to become any thing but a weak
and rickety babe? Still, in spite of neglect, I continued to exist, to
learn to curse existence, [her countenance grew ferocious as she
spoke,] and the treatment that rendered me miserable, seemed to sharpen
my wits. Confined then in a damp hovel, to rock the cradle of the
succeeding tribe, I looked like a little old woman, or a hag
shrivelling into nothing. The furrows of reflection and care contracted
the youthful cheek, and gave a sort of supernatural wildness to the
ever watchful eye. During this period, my father had married another
fellow-servant, who loved him less, and knew better how to manage his
passion, than my mother. She likewise proving with child, they agreed
to keep a shop: my step-mother, if, being an illegitimate offspring, I
may venture thus to characterize her, having obtained a sum of a rich
relation, for that purpose.

“Soon after her lying-in, she prevailed on my father to take me home,
to save the expense of maintaining me, and of hiring a girl to assist
her in the care of the child. I was young, it was true, but appeared a
knowing little thing, and might be made handy. Accordingly I was
brought to her house; but not to a home—for a home I never knew. Of
this child, a daughter, she was extravagantly fond; and it was a part
of my employment, to assist to spoil her, by humouring all her whims,
and bearing all her caprices. Feeling her own consequence, before she
could speak, she had learned the art of tormenting me, and if I ever
dared to resist, I received blows, laid on with no compunctious hand,
or was sent to bed dinnerless, as well as supperless. I said that it
was a part of my daily labour to attend this child, with the servility
of a slave; still it was but a part. I was sent out in all seasons, and
from place to place, to carry burdens far above my strength, without
being allowed to draw near the fire, or ever being cheered by
encouragement or kindness. No wonder then, treated like a creature of
another species, that I began to envy, and at length to hate, the
darling of the house. Yet, I perfectly remember, that it was the
caresses, and kind expressions of my step-mother, which first excited
my jealous discontent. Once, I cannot forget it, when she was calling
in vain her wayward child to kiss her, I ran to her, saying, ‘I will
kiss you, ma’am!’ and how did my heart, which was in my mouth, sink,
what was my debasement of soul, when pushed away with—‘I do not want
you, pert thing!’ Another day, when a new gown had excited the highest
good humour, and she uttered the appropriate dear, addressed
unexpectedly to me, I thought I could never do enough to please her; I
was all alacrity, and rose proportionably in my own estimation.

“As her daughter grew up, she was pampered with cakes and fruit, while
I was, literally speaking, fed with the refuse of the table, with her
leavings. A liquorish tooth is, I believe, common to children, and I
used to steal any thing sweet, that I could catch up with a chance of
concealment. When detected, she was not content to chastize me herself
at the moment, but, on my father’s return in the evening (he was a
shopman), the principal discourse was to recount my faults, and
attribute them to the wicked disposition which I had brought into the
world with me, inherited from my mother. He did not fail to leave the
marks of his resentment on my body, and then solaced himself by playing
with my sister.—I could have murdered her at those moments. To save
myself from these unmerciful corrections, I resorted to falshood, and
the untruths which I sturdily maintained, were brought in judgment
against me, to support my tyrant’s inhuman charge of my natural
propensity to vice. Seeing me treated with contempt, and always being
fed and dressed better, my sister conceived a contemptuous opinion of
me, that proved an obstacle to all affection; and my father, hearing
continually of my faults, began to consider me as a curse entailed on
him for his sins: he was therefore easily prevailed on to bind me
apprentice to one of my step-mother’s friends, who kept a slop-shop in
Wapping. I was represented (as it was said) in my true colours; but
she, ‘warranted,’ snapping her fingers, ‘that she should break my
spirit or heart.’

“My mother replied, with a whine, ‘that if any body could make me
better, it was such a clever woman as herself; though, for her own
part, she had tried in vain; but good-nature was her fault.’

“I shudder with horror, when I recollect the treatment I had now to
endure. Not only under the lash of my task-mistress, but the drudge of
the maid, apprentices and children, I never had a taste of human
kindness to soften the rigour of perpetual labour. I had been
introduced as an object of abhorrence into the family; as a creature of
whom my step-mother, though she had been kind enough to let me live in
the house with her own child, could make nothing. I was described as a
wretch, whose nose must be kept to the grinding stone—and it was held
there with an iron grasp. It seemed indeed the privilege of their
superior nature to kick me about, like the dog or cat. If I were
attentive, I was called fawning, if