The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Lost Continent
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Lost Continent

Author: Edgar Rice Burroughs


        
Release date: July 1, 1994 [eBook #149]
                Most recently updated: November 29, 2020

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/149

Credits: Produced by Judith Boss.  HTML version by Al Haines.


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LOST CONTINENT ***




Produced by Judith Boss.  HTML version by Al Haines.




The Lost Continent

by Edgar Rice Burroughs

The Lost Continent was originally published
under the title Beyond Thirty


Contents

 CHAPTER I
 CHAPTER II
 CHAPTER III
 CHAPTER IV
 CHAPTER V
 CHAPTER VI
 CHAPTER VII
 CHAPTER VIII
 CHAPTER IX




CHAPTER I.


Since earliest childhood I have been strangely fascinated by the
mystery surrounding the history of the last days of twentieth century
Europe. My interest is keenest, perhaps, not so much in relation to
known facts as to speculation upon the unknowable of the two centuries
that have rolled by since human intercourse between the Western and
Eastern Hemispheres ceased—the mystery of Europe’s state following the
termination of the Great War—provided, of course, that the war had been
terminated.

From out of the meagerness of our censored histories we learned that
for fifteen years after the cessation of diplomatic relations between
the United States of North America and the belligerent nations of the
Old World, news of more or less doubtful authenticity filtered, from
time to time, into the Western Hemisphere from the Eastern.

Then came the fruition of that historic propaganda which is best
described by its own slogan: “The East for the East—the West for the
West,” and all further intercourse was stopped by statute.

Even prior to this, transoceanic commerce had practically ceased, owing
to the perils and hazards of the mine-strewn waters of both the
Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. Just when submarine activities ended we do
not know but the last vessel of this type sighted by a Pan-American
merchantman was the huge Q 138, which discharged twenty-nine torpedoes
at a Brazilian tank steamer off the Bermudas in the fall of 1972. A
heavy sea and the excellent seamanship of the master of the Brazilian
permitted the Pan-American to escape and report this last of a long
series of outrages upon our commerce. God alone knows how many hundreds
of our ancient ships fell prey to the roving steel sharks of
blood-frenzied Europe. Countless were the vessels and men that passed
over our eastern and western horizons never to return; but whether they
met their fates before the belching tubes of submarines or among the
aimlessly drifting mine fields, no man lived to tell.

And then came the great Pan-American Federation which linked the
Western Hemisphere from pole to pole under a single flag, which joined
the navies of the New World into the mightiest fighting force that ever
sailed the seven seas—the greatest argument for peace the world had
ever known.

Since that day peace had reigned from the western shores of the Azores
to the western shores of the Hawaiian Islands, nor has any man of
either hemisphere dared cross 30°W. or 175°W. From 30° to 175° is
ours—from 30° to 175° is peace, prosperity and happiness.

Beyond was the great unknown. Even the geographies of my boyhood showed
nothing beyond. We were taught of nothing beyond. Speculation was
discouraged. For two hundred years the Eastern Hemisphere had been
wiped from the maps and histories of Pan-America. Its mention in
fiction, even, was forbidden.

Our ships of peace patrol thirty and one hundred seventy-five. What
ships from beyond they have warned only the secret archives of
government show; but, a naval officer myself, I have gathered from the
traditions of the service that it has been fully two hundred years
since smoke or sail has been sighted east of 30° or west of 175°. The
fate of the relinquished provinces which lay beyond the dead lines we
could only speculate upon. That they were taken by the military power,
which rose so suddenly in China after the fall of the republic, and
which wrested Manchuria and Korea from Russia and Japan, and also
absorbed the Philippines, is quite within the range of possibility.

It was the commander of a Chinese man-of-war who received a copy of the
edict of 1972 from the hand of my illustrious ancestor, Admiral Turck,
on one hundred seventy-five, two hundred and six years ago, and from
the yellowed pages of the admiral’s diary I learned that the fate of
the Philippines was even then presaged by these Chinese naval officers.

Yes, for over two hundred years no man crossed 30° to 175° and lived to
tell his story—not until chance drew me across and back again, and
public opinion, revolting at last against the drastic regulations of
our long-dead forbears, demanded that my story be given to the world,
and that the narrow interdict which commanded peace, prosperity, and
happiness to halt at 30° and 175° be removed forever.

I am glad that it was given to me to be an instrument in the hands of
Providence for the uplifting of benighted Europe, and the amelioration
of the suffering, degradation, and abysmal ignorance in which I found
her.

I shall not live to see the complete regeneration of the savage hordes
of the Eastern Hemisphere—that is a work which will require many
generations, perhaps ages, so complete has been their reversion to
savagery; but I know that the work has been started, and I am proud of
the share in it which my generous countrymen have placed in my hands.

The government already possesses a complete official report of my
adventures beyond thirty. In the narrative I purpose telling my story
in a less formal, and I hope, a more entertaining, style; though, being
only a naval officer and without claim to the slightest literary
ability, I shall most certainly fall far short of the possibilities
which are inherent in my subject. That I have passed through the most
wondrous adventures that have befallen a civilized man during the past
two centuries encourages me in the belief that, however ill the
telling, the facts themselves will command your interest to the final
page.

Beyond thirty! Romance, adventure, strange peoples, fearsome beasts—all
the excitement and scurry of the lives of the twentieth century
ancients that have been denied us in these dull days of peace and
prosaic prosperity—all, all lay beyond thirty, the invisible barrier
between the stupid, commercial present and the carefree, barbarous
past.

What boy has not sighed for the good old days of wars, revolutions, and
riots; how I used to pore over the chronicles of those old days, those
dear old days, when workmen went armed to their labors; when they fell
upon one another with gun and bomb and dagger, and the streets ran red
with blood! Ah, but those were the times when life was worth the
living; when a man who went out by night knew not at which dark corner
a “footpad” might leap upon and slay him; when wild beasts roamed the
forest and the jungles, and there were savage men, and countries yet
unexplored.

Now, in all the Western Hemisphere dwells no man who may not find a
school house within walking distance of his home, or at least within
flying distance.

The wildest beast that roams our waste places lairs in the frozen north
or the frozen south within a government reserve, where the curious may
view him and feed him bread crusts from the hand with perfect impunity.

But beyond thirty! And I have gone there, and come back; and now you
may go there, for no longer is it high treason, punishable by disgrace
or death, to cross 30° or 175°.

My name is Jefferson Turck. I am a lieutenant in the navy—in the great
Pan-American navy, the only navy which now exists in all the world.

I was born in Arizona, in the United States of North America, in the
year of our Lord 2116. Therefore, I am twenty-one years old.

In early boyhood I tired of the teeming cities and overcrowded rural
districts of Arizona. Every generation of Turcks for over two centuries
has been represented in the navy. The navy called to me, as did the
free, wide, unpeopled spaces of the mighty oceans. And so I joined the
navy, coming up from the ranks, as we all must, learning our craft as
we advance. My promotion was rapid, for my family seems to inherit
naval lore. We are born officers, and I reserve to myself no special
credit for an early advancement in the service.

At twenty I found myself a lieutenant in command of the aero-submarine
Coldwater, of the SS-96 class. The Coldwater was one of the first of
the air and underwater craft which have been so greatly improved since
its launching, and was possessed of innumerable weaknesses which,
fortunately, have been eliminated in more recent vessels of similar
type.

Even when I took command, she was fit only for the junk pile; but the
world-old parsimony of government retained her in active service, and
sent two hundred men to sea in her, with myself, a mere boy, in command
of her, to patrol thirty from Iceland to the Azores.

Much of my service had been spent aboard the great merchantmen-of-war.
These are the utility naval vessels that have transformed the navies of
old, which burdened the peoples with taxes for their support, into the
present day fleets of self-supporting ships that find ample time for
target practice and gun drill while they bear freight and the mails
from the continents to the far-scattered island of Pan-America.

This change in service was most welcome to me, especially as it brought
with it coveted responsibilities of sole command, and I was prone to
overlook the deficiencies of the Coldwater in the natural pride I felt
in my first ship.

The Coldwater was fully equipped for two months’ patrolling—the
ordinary length of assignment to this service—and a month had already
passed, its monotony entirely unrelieved by sight of another craft,
when the first of our misfortunes befell.

We had been riding out a storm at an altitude of about three thousand
feet. All night we had hovered above the tossing billows of the
moonlight clouds. The detonation of the thunder and the glare of
lightning through an occasional rift in the vaporous wall proclaimed
the continued fury of the tempest upon the surface of the sea; but we,
far above it all, rode in comparative ease upon the upper gale. With
the coming of dawn the clouds beneath us became a glorious sea of gold
and silver, soft and beautiful; but they could not deceive us as to the
blackness and the terrors of the storm-lashed ocean which they hid.

I was at breakfast when my chief engineer entered and saluted. His face
was grave, and I thought he was even a trifle paler than usual.

“Well?” I asked.

He drew the back of his forefinger nervously across his brow in a
gesture that was habitual with him in moments of mental stress.

“The gravitation-screen generators, sir,” he said. “Number one went to
the bad about an hour and a half ago. We have been working upon it
steadily since; but I have to report, sir, that it is beyond repair.”

“Number two will keep us supplied,” I answered. “In the meantime we
will send a wireless for relief.”

“But that is the trouble, sir,” he went on. “Number two has stopped. I
knew it would come, sir. I made a report on these generators three
years ago. I advised then that they both be scrapped. Their principle
is entirely wrong. They’re done for.” And, with a grim smile, “I shall
at least have the satisfaction of knowing my report was accurate.”

“Have we sufficient reserve screen to permit us to make land, or, at
least, meet our relief halfway?” I asked.

“No, sir,” he replied gravely; “we are sinking now.”

“Have you anything further to report?” I asked.

“No, sir,” he said.

“Very good,” I replied; and, as I dismissed him, I rang for my wireless
operator. When he appeared, I gave him a message to the secretary of
the navy, to whom all vessels in service on thirty and one hundred
seventy-five report direct. I explained our predicament, and stated
that with what screening force remained I should continue in the air,
making as rapid headway toward St. Johns as possible, and that when we
were forced to take to the water I should continue in the same
direction.

The accident occurred directly over 30° and about 52° N. The surface
wind was blowing a tempest from the west. To attempt to ride out such a
storm upon the surface seemed suicidal, for the Coldwater was not
designed for surface navigation except under fair weather conditions.
Submerged, or in the air, she was tractable enough in any sort of
weather when under control; but without her screen generators she was
almost helpless, since she could not fly, and, if submerged, could not
rise to the surface.

All these defects have been remedied in later models; but the knowledge
did not help us any that day aboard the slowly settling Coldwater, with
an angry sea roaring beneath, a tempest raging out of the west, and 30°
only a few knots astern.

To cross thirty or one hundred seventy-five has been, as you know, the
direst calamity that could befall a naval commander. Court-martial and
degradation follow swiftly, unless as is often the case, the
unfortunate man takes his own life before this unjust and heartless
regulation can hold him up to public scorn.

There has been in the past no excuse, no circumstance, that could
palliate the offense.

“He was in command, and he took his ship across thirty!” That was
sufficient. It might not have been in any way his fault, as, in the
case of the Coldwater, it could not possibly have been justly charged
to my account that the gravitation-screen generators were worthless;
but well I knew that should chance have it that we were blown across
thirty today—as we might easily be before the terrific west wind that
we could hear howling below us, the responsibility would fall upon my
shoulders.

In a way, the regulation was a good one, for it certainly accomplished
that for which it was intended. We all fought shy of 30° on the east
and 175° on the west, and, though we had to skirt them pretty close,
nothing but an act of God ever drew one of us across. You all are
familiar with the naval tradition that a good officer could sense
proximity to either line, and for my part, I am as firmly convinced of
the truth of this as I am that the compass finds the north without
recourse to tedious processes of reasoning.

Old Admiral Sanchez was wont to maintain that he could smell thirty,
and the men of the first ship in which I sailed claimed that Coburn,
the navigating officer, knew by name every wave along thirty from 60°N.
to 60°S. However, I’d hate to vouch for this.

Well, to get back to my narrative; we kept on dropping slowly toward
the surface the while we bucked the west wind, clawing away from thirty
as fast as we could. I was on the bridge, and as we dropped from the
brilliant sunlight into the dense vapor of clouds and on down through
them to the wild, dark storm strata beneath, it seemed that my spirits
dropped with the falling ship, and the buoyancy of hope ran low in
sympathy.

The waves were running to tremendous heights, and the Coldwater was not
designed to meet such waves head on. Her elements were the blue ether,
far above the raging storm, or the greater depths of ocean, which no
storm could ruffle.

As I stood speculating upon our chances once we settled into the
frightful Maelstrom beneath us and at the same time mentally computing
the hours which must elapse before aid could reach us, the wireless
operator clambered up the ladder to the bridge, and, disheveled and
breathless, stood before me at salute. It needed but a glance at him to
assure me that something was amiss.

“What now?” I asked.

“The wireless, sir!” he cried. “My God, sir, I cannot send.”

“But the emergency outfit?” I asked.

“I have tried everything, sir. I have exhausted every resource. We
cannot send,” and he drew himself up and saluted again.

I dismissed him with a few kind words, for I knew that it was through
no fault of his that the mechanism was antiquated and worthless, in
common with the balance of the Coldwaterl’s equipment. There was no
finer operator in Pan-America than he.

The failure of the wireless did not appear as momentous to me as to
him, which is not unnatural, since it is but human to feel that when
our own little cog slips, the entire universe must necessarily be put
out of gear. I knew that if this storm were destined to blow us across
thirty, or send us to the bottom of the ocean, no help could reach us
in time to prevent it. I had ordered the message sent solely because
regulations required it, and not with any particular hope that we could
benefit by it in our present extremity.

I had little time to dwell upon the coincidence of the simultaneous
failure of the wireless and the buoyancy generators, since very shortly
after the Coldwater had dropped so low over the waters that all my
attention was necessarily centered upon the delicate business of
settling upon the waves without breaking my shipl’s back. With our
buoyancy generators in commission it would have been a simple thing to
enter the water, since then it would have been but a trifling matter of
a forty-five degree dive into the base of a huge wave. We should have
cut into the water like a hot knife through butter, and have been
totally submerged with scarce a jar—I have done it a thousand times—but
I did not dare submerge the Coldwater for fear that it would remain
submerged to the end of time—a condition far from conducive to the
longevity of commander or crew.

Most of my officers were older men than I. John Alvarez, my first
officer, is twenty years my senior. He stood at my side on the bridge
as the ship glided closer and closer to those stupendous waves. He
watched my every move, but he was by far too fine an officer and
gentleman to embarrass me by either comment or suggestion.

When I saw that we soon would touch, I ordered the ship brought around
broadside to the wind, and there we hovered a moment until a huge wave
reached up and seized us upon its crest, and then I gave the order that
suddenly reversed the screening force, and let us into the ocean. Down
into the trough we went, wallowing like the carcass of a dead whale,
and then began the fight, with rudder and propellers, to force the
Coldwater back into the teeth of the gale and drive her on and on,
farther and farther from relentless thirty.

I think that we should have succeeded, even though the ship was wracked
from stem to stern by the terrific buffetings she received, and though
she were half submerged the greater part of the time, had no further
accident befallen us.

We were making headway, though slowly, and it began to look as though
we were going to pull through. Alvarez never left my side, though I all
but ordered him below for much-needed rest. My second officer, Porfirio
Johnson, was also often on the bridge. He was a good officer, but a man
for whom I had conceived a rather unreasoning aversion almost at the
first moment of meeting him, an aversion which was not lessened by the
knowledge which I subsequently gained that he looked upon my rapid
promotion with jealousy. He was ten years my senior both in years and
service, and I rather think he could never forget the fact that he had
been an officer when I was a green apprentice.

As it became more and more apparent that the Coldwater, under my
seamanship, was weathering the tempest and giving promise of pulling
through safely, I could have sworn that I perceived a shade of
annoyance and disappointment growing upon his dark countenance. He left
the bridge finally and went below. I do not know that he is directly
responsible for what followed so shortly after; but I have always had
my suspicions, and Alvarez is even more prone to place the blame upon
him than I.

It was about six bells of the forenoon watch that Johnson returned to
the bridge after an absence of some thirty minutes. He seemed nervous
and ill at ease—a fact which made little impression on me at the time,
but which both Alvarez and I recalled subsequently.

Not three minutes after his reappearance at my side the Coldwater
suddenly commenced to lose headway. I seized the telephone at my elbow,
pressing upon the button which would call the chief engineer to the
instrument in the bowels of the ship, only to find him already at the
receiver attempting to reach me.

“Numbers one, two, and five engines have broken down, sir,” he called.
“Shall we force the remaining three?”

“We can do nothing else,” I bellowed into the transmitter.

“They won’t stand the gaff, sir,” he returned.

“Can you suggest a better plan?” I asked.

“No, sir,” he replied.

“Then give them the gaff, lieutenant,” I shouted back, and hung up the
receiver.

For twenty minutes the Coldwater bucked the great seas with her three
engines. I doubt if she advanced a foot; but it was enough to keep her
nose in the wind, and, at least, we were not drifting toward thirty.

Johnson and Alvarez were at my side when, without warning, the bow
swung swiftly around and the ship fell into the trough of the sea.

“The other three have gone,” I said, and I happened to be looking at
Johnson as I spoke. Was it the shadow of a satisfied smile that crossed
his thin lips? I do not know; but at least he did not weep.

“You always have been curious, sir, about the great unknown beyond
thirty,” he said. “You are in a good way to have your curiosity
satisfied.” And then I could not mistake the slight sneer that curved
his upper lip. There must have been a trace of disrespect in his tone
or manner which escaped me, for Alvarez turned upon him like a flash.

“When Lieutenant Turck crosses thirty,” he said, “we shall all cross
with him, and God help the officer or the man who reproaches him!”

“I shall not be a party to high treason,” snapped Johnson. “The
regulations are explicit, and if the Coldwater crosses thirty it
devolves upon you to place Lieutenant Turck under arrest and
immediately exert every endeavor to bring the ship back into
Pan-American waters.”

“I shall not know,” replied Alvarez, “that the Coldwater passes thirty;
nor shall any other man aboard know it,” and, with his words, he drew a
revolver from his pocket, and before either I or Johnson could prevent
it had put a bullet into every instrument upon the bridge, ruining them
beyond repair.

And then he saluted me, and strode from the bridge, a martyr to loyalty
and friendship, for, though no man might know that Lieutenant Jefferson
Turck had taken his ship across thirty, every man aboard would know
that the first officer had committed a crime that was punishable by
both degradation and death. Johnson turned and eyed me narrowly.

“Shall I place him under arrest?” he asked.

“You shall not,” I replied. “Nor shall anyone else.”

“You become a party to his crime!” he cried angrily.

“You may go below, Mr. Johnson,” I said, “and attend to the work of
unpacking the extra instruments and having them properly set upon the
bridge.”

He saluted, and left me, and for some time I stood, gazing out upon the
angry waters, my mind filled with unhappy reflections upon the unjust
fate that had overtaken me, and the sorrow and disgrace that I had
unwittingly brought down upon my house.

I rejoiced that I should leave neither wife nor child to bear the
burden of my shame throughout their lives.

As I thought upon my misfortune, I considered more clearly than ever
before the unrighteousness of the regulation which was to prove my
doom, and in the natural revolt against its injustice my anger rose,
and there mounted within me a feeling which I imagine must have
paralleled that spirit that once was prevalent among the ancients
called anarchy.

For the first time in my life I found my sentiments arraying themselves
against custom, tradition, and even government. The wave of rebellion
swept over me in an instant, beginning with an heretical doubt as to
the sanctity of the established order of things—that fetish which has
ruled Pan-Americans for two centuries, and which is based upon a blind
faith in the infallibility of the prescience of the long-dead framers
of the articles of Pan-American federation—and ending in an adamantine
determination to defend my honor and my life to the last ditch against
the blind and senseless regulation which assumed the synonymity of
misfortune and treason.

I would replace the destroyed instruments upon the bridge; every
officer and man should know when we crossed thirty. But then I should
assert the spirit which dominated me, I should resist arrest, and
insist upon bringing my ship back across the dead line, remaining at my
post until we had reached New York. Then I should make a full report,
and with it a demand upon public opinion that the dead lines be wiped
forever from the seas.

I knew that I was right. I knew that no more loyal officer wore the
uniform of the navy. I knew that I was a good officer and sailor, and I
didn’t propose submitting to degradation and discharge because a lot of
old, preglacial fossils had declared over two hundred years before that
no man should cross thirty.

Even while these thoughts were passing through my mind I was busy with
the details of my duties. I had seen to it that a sea anchor was
rigged, and even now the men had completed their task, and the
Coldwater was swinging around rapidly, her nose pointing once more into
the wind, and the frightful rolling consequent upon her wallowing in
the trough was happily diminishing.

It was then that Johnson came hurrying to the bridge. One of his eyes
was swollen and already darkening, and his lip was cut and bleeding.
Without even the formality of a salute, he burst upon me, white with
fury.

“Lieutenant Alvarez attacked me!” he cried. “I demand that he be placed
under arrest. I found him in the act of destroying the reserve
instruments, and when I would have interfered to protect them he fell
upon me and beat me. I demand that you arrest him!”

“You forget yourself, Mr. Johnson,” I said. “You are not in command of
the ship. I deplore the action of Lieutenant Alvarez, but I cannot
expunge from my mind the loyalty and self-sacrificing friendship which
has prompted him to his acts. Were I you, sir, I should profit by the
example he has set. Further, Mr. Johnson, I intend retaining command of
the ship, even though she crosses thirty, and I shall demand implicit
obedience from every officer and man aboard until I am properly
relieved from duty by a superior officer in the port of New York.”

“You mean to say that you will cross thirty without submitting to
arrest?” he almost shouted.

“I do, sir,” I replied. “And now you may go below, and, when again you
find it necessary to address me, you will please be so good as to bear
in mind the fact that I am your commanding officer, and as such
entitled to a salute.”

He flushed, hesitated a moment, and then, saluting, turned upon his
heel and left the bridge. Shortly after, Alvarez appeared. He was pale,
and seemed to have aged ten years in the few brief minutes since I last
had seen him. Saluting, he told me very simply what he had done, and
asked that I place him under arrest.

I put my hand on his shoulder, and I guess that my voice trembled a
trifle as, while reproving him for his act, I made it plain to him that
my gratitude was no less potent a force than his loyalty to me. Then it
was that I outlined to him my purpose to defy the regulation that had
raised the dead lines, and to take my ship back to New York myself.

I did not ask him to share the responsibility with me. I merely stated
that I should refuse to submit to arrest, and that I should demand of
him and every other officer and man implicit obedience to my every
command until we docked at home.

His face brightened at my words, and he assured me that I would find
him as ready to acknowledge my command upon the wrong side of thirty as
upon the right, an assurance which I hastened to tell him I did not
need.

The storm continued to rage for three days, and as far as the wind
scarce varied a point during all that time, I knew that we must be far
beyond thirty, drifting rapidly east by south. All this time it had
been impossible to work upon the damaged engines or the gravity-screen
generators; but we had a full set of instruments upon the bridge, for
Alvarez, after discovering my intentions, had fetched the reserve
instruments from his own cabin, where he had hidden them. Those which
Johnson had seen him destroy had been a third set which only Alvarez
had known was aboard the Coldwater.

We waited impatiently for the sun, that we might determine our exact
location, and upon the fourth day our vigil was rewarded a few minutes
before noon.

Every officer and man aboard was tense with nervous excitement as we
awaited the result of the reading. The crew had known almost as soon as
I that we were doomed to cross thirty, and I am inclined to believe
that every man jack of them was tickled to death, for the spirits of
adventure and romance still live in the hearts of men of the
twenty-second century, even though there be little for them to feed
upon between thirty and one hundred seventy-five.

The men carried none of the burdens of responsibility. They might cross
thirty with impunity, and doubtless they would return to be heroes at
home; but how different the home-coming of their commanding officer!

The wind had dropped to a steady blow, still from west by north, and
the sea had gone down correspondingly. The crew, with the exception of
those whose duties kept them below, were ranged on deck below the
bridge. When our position was definitely fixed I personally announced
it to the eager, waiting men.

“Men,” I said, stepping forward to the handrail and looking down into
their upturned, bronzed faces, “you are anxiously awaiting information
as to the shipl’s position. It has been determined at latitude fifty
degrees seven minutes north, longitude twenty degrees sixteen minutes
west.”

I paused and a buzz of animated comment ran through the massed men
beneath me. “Beyond thirty. But there will be no change in commanding
officers, in routine or in discipline, until after we have docked again
in New York.”

As I ceased speaking and stepped back from the rail there was a roar of
applause from the deck such as I never before had heard aboard a ship
of peace. It recalled to my mind tales that I had read of the good old
days when naval vessels were built to fight, when ships of peace had
been men-of-war, and guns had flashed in other than futile target
practice, and decks had run red with blood.

With the subsidence of the sea, we were able to go to work upon the
damaged engines to some effect, and I also set men to examining the
gravitation-screen generators with a view to putting them in working
order should it prove not beyond our resources.

For two weeks we labored at the engines, which indisputably showed
evidence of having been tampered with. I appointed a board to
investigate and report upon the disaster. But it accomplished nothing
other than to convince me that there were several officers upon it who
were in full sympathy with Johnson, for, though no charges had been
preferred against him, the board went out of its way specifically to
exonerate him in its findings.

All this time we were drifting almost due east. The work upon the
engines had progressed to such an extent that within a few hours we
might expect to be able to proceed under our own power westward in the
direction of Pan-American waters.

To relieve the monotony I had taken to fishing, and early that morning
I had departed from the Coldwater in one of the boats on such an
excursion. A gentle west wind was blowing. The sea shimmered in the
sunlight. A cloudless sky canopied the west for our sport, as I had
made it a point never voluntarily to make an inch toward the east that
I could avoid. At least, they should not be able to charge me with a
willful violation of the dead lines regulation.

I had with me only the boatl’s ordinary complement of men—three in all,
and more than enough to handle any small power boat. I had not asked
any of my officers to accompany me, as I wished to be alone, and very
glad am I now that I had not. My only regret is that, in view of what
befell us, it had been necessary to bring the three brave fellows who
manned the boat.

Our fishing, which proved excellent, carried us so far to the west that
we no longer could see the Coldwater. The day wore on, until at last,
about mid-afternoon, I gave the order to return to the ship.

We had proceeded but a short distance toward the east when one of the
men gave an exclamation of excitement, at the same time pointing
eastward. We all looked on in the direction he had indicated, and
there, a short distance above the horizon, we saw the outlines of the
Coldwater silhouetted against the sky.

“They’ve repaired the engines and the generators both,” exclaimed one
of the men.

It seemed impossible, but yet it had evidently been done. Only that
morning, Lieutenant Johnson had told me that he feared that it would be
impossible to repair the generators. I had put him in charge of this
work, since he always had been accounted one of the best
gravitation-screen men in the navy. He had invented several of the
improvements that are incorporated in the later models of these
generators, and I am convinced that he knows more concerning both the
theory and the practice of screening gravitation than any living
Pan-American.

At the sight of the Coldwater once more under control, the three men
burst into a glad cheer. But, for some reason which I could not then
account, I was strangely overcome by a premonition of personal
misfortune. It was not that I now anticipated an early return to
Pan-America and a board of inquiry, for I had rather looked forward to
the fight that must follow my return. No, there was something else,
something indefinable and vague that cast a strange gloom upon me as I
saw my ship rising farther above the water and making straight in our
direction.

I was not long in ascertaining a possible explanation of my depression,
for, though we were plainly visible from the bridge of the
aero-submarine and to the hundreds of men who swarmed her deck, the
ship passed directly above us, not five hundred feet from the water,
and sped directly westward.

We all shouted, and I fired my pistol to attract their attention,
though I knew full well that all who cared to had observed us, but the
ship moved steadily away, growing smaller and smaller to our view until
at last she passed completely out of sight.




CHAPTER II.


What could it mean? I had left Alvarez in command. He was my most loyal
subordinate. It was absolutely beyond the pale of possibility that
Alvarez should desert me. No, there was some other explanation.
Something occurred to place my second officer, Porfirio Johnson, in
command. I was sure of it but why speculate? The futility of conjecture
was only too palpable. The Coldwater had abandoned us in midocean.
Doubtless none of us would survive to know why.

The young man at the wheel of the power boat had turned her nose about
as it became evident that the ship intended passing over us, and now he
still held her in futile pursuit of the Coldwater.

“Bring her about, Snider,” I directed, “and hold her due east. We can’t
catch the Coldwater, and we can’t cross the Atlantic in this. Our only
hope lies in making the nearest land, which, unless I am mistaken, is
the Scilly Islands, off the southwest coast of England. Ever heard of
England, Snider?”

“There’s a part of the United States of North America that used to be
known to the ancients as New England,” he replied. “Is that where you
mean, sir?”

“No, Snider,” I replied. “The England I refer to was an island off the
continent of Europe. It was the seat of a very powerful kingdom that
flourished over two hundred years ago. A part of the United States of
North America and all of the Federated States of Canada once belonged
to this ancient England.”

“Europe,” breathed one of the men, his voice tense with excitement. “My
grandfather used to tell me stories of the world beyond thirty. He had
been a great student, and he had read much from forbidden books.”

“In which I resemble your grandfather,” I said, “for I, too, have read
more even than naval officers are supposed to read, and, as you men
know, we are permitted a greater latitude in the study of geography and
history than men of other professions.

“Among the books and papers of Admiral Porter Turck, who lived two
hundred years ago, and from whom I am descended, many volumes still
exist, and are in my possession, which deal with the history and
geography of ancient Europe. Usually I bring several of these books
with me upon a cruise, and this time, among others, I have maps of
Europe and her surrounding waters. I was studying them as we came away
from the Coldwater this morning, and luckily I have them with me.”

“You are going to try to make Europe, sir?” asked Taylor, the young man
who had last spoken.

“It is the nearest land,” I replied. “I have always wanted to explore
the forgotten lands of the Eastern Hemisphere. Here’s our chance. To
remain at sea is to perish. None of us ever will see home again. Let us
make the best of it, and enjoy while we do live that which is forbidden
the balance of our race—the adventure and the mystery which lie beyond
thirty.”

Taylor and Delcarte seized the spirit of my mood but Snider, I think,
was a trifle sceptical.

“It is treason, sir,” I replied, “but there is no law which compels us
to visit punishment upon ourselves. Could we return to Pan-America, I
should be the first to insist that we face it. But we know thatl’s not
possible. Even if this craft would carry us so far, we haven’t enough
water or food for more than three days.

“We are doomed, Snider, to die far from home and without ever again
looking upon the face of another fellow countryman than those who sit
here now in this boat. Isn’t that punishment sufficient for even the
most exacting judge?”

Even Snider had to admit that it was.

“Very well, then, let us live while we live, and enjoy to the fullest
whatever of adventure or pleasure each new day brings, since any day
may be our last, and we shall be dead for a considerable while.”

I could see that Snider was still fearful, but Taylor and Delcarte
responded with a hearty, “Aye, aye, sir!”

They were of different mold. Both were sons of naval officers. They
represented the aristocracy of birth, and they dared to think for
themselves.

Snider was in the minority, and so we continued toward the east. Beyond
thirty, and separated from my ship, my authority ceased. I held
leadership, if I was to hold it at all, by virtue of personal
qualifications only, but I did not doubt my ability to remain the
director of our destinies in so far as they were amenable to human
agencies. I have always led. While my brain and brawn remain unimpaired
I shall continue always to lead. Following is an art which Turcks do
not easily learn.

It was not until the third day that we raised land, dead ahead, which I
took, from my map, to be the isles of Scilly. But such a gale was
blowing that I did not dare attempt to land, and so we passed to the
north of them, skirted Landl’s End, and entered the English Channel.

I think that up to that moment I had never experienced such a thrill as
passed through me when I realized that I was navigating these historic
waters. The lifelong dreams that I never had dared hope to see
fulfilled were at last a reality—but under what forlorn circumstances!

Never could I return to my native land. To the end of my days I must
remain in exile. Yet even these thoughts failed to dampen my ardor.

My eyes scanned the waters. To the north I could see the rockbound
coast of Cornwall. Mine were the first American eyes to rest upon it
for more than two hundred years. In vain, I searched for some sign of
ancient commerce that, if history is to be believed, must have dotted
the bosom of the Channel with white sails and blackened the heavens
with the smoke of countless funnels, but as far as eye could reach the
tossing waters of the Channel were empty and deserted.

Toward midnight the wind and sea abated, so that shortly after dawn I
determined to make inshore in an attempt to effect a landing, for we
were sadly in need of fresh water and food.

According to my observations, we were just off Ram Head, and it was my
intention to enter Plymouth Bay and visit Plymouth. From my map it
appeared that this city lay back from the coast a short distance, and
there was another city given as Devonport, which appeared to lie at the
mouth of the river Tamar.

However, I knew that it would make little difference which city we
entered, as the English people were famed of old for their hospitality
toward visiting mariners. As we approached the mouth of the bay I
looked for the fishing craft which I expected to see emerging thus
early in the day for their labors. But even after we rounded Ram Head
and were well within the waters of the bay I saw no vessel. Neither was
there buoy nor light nor any other mark to show larger ships the
channel, and I wondered much at this.

The coast was densely overgrown, nor was any building or sign of man
apparent from the water. Up the bay and into the River Tamar we motored
through a solitude as unbroken as that which rested upon the waters of
the Channel. For all we could see, there was no indication that man had
ever set his foot upon this silent coast.

I was nonplused, and then, for the first time, there crept over me an
intuition of the truth.

Here was no sign of war. As far as this portion of the Devon coast was
concerned, that seemed to have been over for many years, but neither
were there any people. Yet I could not find it within myself to believe
that I should find no inhabitants in England. Reasoning thus, I
discovered that it was improbable that a state of war still existed,
and that the people all had been drawn from this portion of England to
some other, where they might better defend themselves against an
invader.

But what of their ancient coast defenses? What was there here in
Plymouth Bay to prevent an enemy landing in force and marching where
they wished? Nothing. I could not believe that any enlightened military
nation, such as the ancient English are reputed to have been, would
have voluntarily so deserted an exposed coast and an excellent harbor
to the mercies of an enemy.

I found myself becoming more and more deeply involved in quandary. The
puzzle which confronted me I could not unravel. We had landed, and I
now stood upon the spot where, according to my map, a large city should
rear its spires and chimneys. There was nothing but rough, broken
ground covered densely with weeds and brambles, and tall, rank grass.

Had a city ever stood there, no sign of it remained. The roughness and
unevenness of the ground suggested something of a great mass of debris
hidden by the accumulation of centuries of undergrowth.

I drew the short cutlass with which both officers and men of the navy
are, as you know, armed out of courtesy to the traditions and memories
of the past, and with its point dug into the loam about the roots of
the vegetation growing at my feet.

The blade entered the soil for a matter of seven inches, when it struck
upon something stonelike. Digging about the obstacle, I presently
loosened it, and when I had withdrawn it from its sepulcher I found the
thing to be an ancient brick of clay, baked in an oven.

Delcarte we had left in charge of the boat; but Snider and Taylor were
with me, and following my example, each engaged in the fascinating
sport of prospecting for antiques. Each of us uncovered a great number
of these bricks, until we commenced to weary of the monotony of it,
when Snider suddenly gave an exclamation of excitement, and, as I
turned to look, he held up a human skull for my inspection.

I took it from him and examined it. Directly in the center of the
forehead was a small round hole. The gentleman had evidently come to
his end defending his country from an invader.

Snider again held aloft another trophy of the search—a metal spike and
some tarnished and corroded metal ornaments. They had lain close beside
the skull.

With the point of his cutlass Snider scraped the dirt and verdigris
from the face of the larger ornament.

“An inscription,” he said, and handed the thing to me.

They were the spike and ornaments of an ancient German helmet. Before
long we had uncovered many other indications that a great battle had
been fought upon the ground where we stood. But I was then, and still
am, at loss to account for the presence of German soldiers upon the
English coast so far from London, which history suggests would have
been the natural goal of an invader.

I can only account for it by assuming that either England was
temporarily conquered by the Teutons, or that an invasion of so vast
proportions was undertaken that German troops were hurled upon the
England coast in huge numbers and that landings were necessarily
effected at many places simultaneously. Subsequent discoveries tend to
strengthen this view.

We dug about for a short time with our cutlasses until I became
convinced that a city had stood upon the spot at some time in the past,
and that beneath our feet, crumbled and dead, lay ancient Devonport.

I could not repress a sigh at the thought of the havoc war had wrought
in this part of England, at least. Farther east, nearer London, we
should find things very different. There would be the civilization that
two centuries must have wrought upon our English cousins as they had
upon us. There would be mighty cities, cultivated fields, happy people.
There we would be welcomed as long-lost brothers. There would we find a
great nation anxious to learn of the world beyond their side of thirty,
as I had been anxious to learn of that which lay beyond our side of the
dead line.

I turned back toward the boat.

“Come, men!” I said. “We will go up the river and fill our casks with
fresh water, search for food and fuel, and then tomorrow be in
readiness to push on toward the east. I am going to London.”




CHAPTER III.


The report of a gun blasted the silence of a dead Devonport with
startling abruptness.

It came from the direction of the launch, and in an instant we three
were running for the boat as fast as our legs would carry us. As we
came in sight of it we saw Delcarte a hundred yards inland from the
launch, leaning over something which lay upon the ground. As we called
to him he waved his cap, and stooping, lifted a small deer for our
inspection.

I was about to congratulate him on his trophy when we were startled by
a horrid, half-human, half-bestial scream a little ahead and to the
right of us. It seemed to come from a clump of rank and tangled bush
not far from where Delcarte stood. It was a horrid, fearsome sound, the
like of which never had fallen upon my ears before.

We looked in the direction from which it came. The smile had died from
Delcarte’s lips. Even at the distance we were from him I saw his face
go suddenly white, and he quickly threw his rifle to his shoulder. At
the same moment the thing that had given tongue to the cry moved from
the concealing brushwood far enough for us, too, to see it.

Both Taylor and Snider gave little gasps of astonishment and dismay.

“What is it, sir?” asked the latter.

The creature stood about the height of a tall manl’s waist, and was
long and gaunt and sinuous, with a tawny coat striped with black, and
with white throat and belly. In conformation it was similar to a cat—a
huge cat, exaggerated colossal cat, with fiendish eyes and the most
devilish cast of countenance, as it wrinkled its bristling snout and
bared its great yellow fangs.

It was pacing, or rather, slinking, straight for Delcarte, who had now
leveled his rifle upon it.

“What is it, sir?” mumbled Snider again, and then a half-forgotten
picture from an old natural history sprang to my mind, and I recognized
in the frightful beast the Felis tigris of ancient Asia, specimens of
which had, in former centuries, been exhibited in the Western
Hemisphere.

Snider and Taylor were armed with rifles and revolvers, while I carried
only a revolver. Seizing Sniderl’s rifle from his trembling hands, I
called to Taylor to follow me, and together we ran forward, shouting,
to attract the beastl’s attention from Delcarte until we should all be
quite close enough to attack with the greatest assurance of success.

I cried to Delcarte not to fire until we reached his side, for I was
fearful lest our small caliber, steel-jacketed bullets should, far from
killing the beast, tend merely to enrage it still further. But he
misunderstood me, thinking that I had ordered him to fire.

With the report of his rifle the tiger stopped short in apparent
surprise, then turned and bit savagely at its shoulder for an instant,
after which it wheeled again toward Delcarte, issuing the most terrific
roars and screams, and launched itself, with incredible speed, toward
the brave fellow, who now stood his ground pumping bullets from his
automatic rifle as rapidly as the weapon would fire.

Taylor and I also opened up on the creature, and as it was broadside to
us it offered a splendid target, though for all the impression we
appeared to make upon the great cat we might as well have been
launching soap bubbles at it.

Straight as a torpedo it rushed for Delcarte, and, as Taylor and I
stumbled on through the tall grass toward our unfortunate comrade, we
saw the tiger rear upon him and crush him to the earth.

Not a backward step had the noble Delcarte taken. Two hundred years of
peace had not sapped the red blood from his courageous line. He went
down beneath that avalanche of bestial savagery still working his gun
and with his face toward his antagonist. Even in the instant that I
thought him dead I could not help but feel a thrill of pride that he
was one of my men, one of my class, a Pan-American gentleman of birth.
And that he had demonstrated one of the principal contentions of the
army-and-navy adherents—that military training was necessary for the
salvation of personal courage in the Pan-American race which for
generations had had to face no dangers more grave than those incident
to ordinary life in a highly civilized community, safeguarded by every
means at the disposal of a perfectly organized and all-powerful
government utilizing the best that advanced science could suggest.

As we ran toward Delcarte, both Taylor and I were struck by the fact
that the beast upon him appeared not to be mauling him, but lay quiet
and motionless upon its prey, and when we were quite close, and the
muzzles of our guns were at the animal’s head, I saw the explanation of
this sudden cessation of hostilities—Felis tigris was dead.

One of our bullets, or one of the last that Delcarte fired, had
penetrated the heart, and the beast had died even as it sprawled
forward crushing Delcarte to the ground.

A moment later, with our assistance, the man had scrambled from beneath
the carcass of his would-be slayer, without a scratch to indicate how
close to death he had been.

Delcarte’s buoyance was entirely unruffled. He came from under the
tiger with a broad grin on his handsome face, nor could I perceive that
a muscle trembled or that his voice showed the least indication of
nervousness or excitement.

With the termination of the adventure, we began to speculate upon the
explanation of the presence of this savage brute at large so great a
distance from its native habitat. My readings had taught me that it was
practically unknown outside of Asia, and that, so late as the twentieth
century, at least, there had been no savage beasts outside captivity in
England.

As we talked, Snider joined us, and I returned his rifle to him. Taylor
and Delcarte picked up the slain deer, and we all started down toward
the launch, walking slowly. Delcarte wanted to fetch the tigerl’s skin,
but I had to deny him permission, since we had no means to properly
cure it.

Upon the beach, we skinned the deer and cut away as much meat as we
thought we could dispose of, and as we were again embarking to continue
up the river for fresh water and fuel, we were startled by a series of
screams from the bushes a short distance away.

“Another Felis tigris,” said Taylor.

“Or a dozen of them,” supplemented Delcarte, and, even as he spoke,
there leaped into sight, one after another, eight of the beasts, full
grown—magnificent specimens.

At the sight of us, they came charging down like infuriated demons. I
saw that three rifles would be no match for them, and so I gave the
word to put out from shore, hoping that the “tiger,” as the ancients
called him, could not swim.

Sure enough, they all halted at the beach, pacing back and forth,
uttering fiendish cries, and glaring at us in the most malevolent
manner.

As we motored away, we presently heard the calls of similar animals far
inland. They seemed to be answering the cries of their fellows at the
waterl’s edge, and from the wide distribution and great volume of the
sound we came to the conclusion that enormous numbers of these beasts
must roam the adjacent country.

“They have eaten up the inhabitants,” murmured Snider, shuddering.

“I imagine you are right,” I agreed, “for their extreme boldness and
fearlessness in the presence of man would suggest either that man is
entirely unknown to them, or that they are extremely familiar with him
as their natural and most easily procured prey.”

“But where did they come from?” asked Delcarte. “Could they have
traveled here from Asia?”

I shook my head. The thing was a puzzle to me. I knew that it was
practically beyond reason to imagine that tigers had crossed the
mountain ranges and rivers and all the great continent of Europe to
travel this far from their native lairs, and entirely impossible that
they should have crossed the English Channel at all. Yet here they
were, and in great numbers.

We continued up the Tamar several miles, filled our casks, and then
landed to cook some of our deer steak, and have the first square meal
that had fallen to our lot since the Coldwater deserted us. But scarce
had we built our fire and prepared the meat for cooking than Snider,
whose eyes had been constantly roving about the landscape from the
moment that we left the launch, touched me on the arm and pointed to a
clump of bushes which grew a couple of hundred yards away.

Half concealed behind their screening foliage I saw the yellow and
black of a big tiger, and, as I looked, the beast stalked majestically
toward us. A moment later, he was followed by another and another, and
it is needless to state that we beat a hasty retreat to the launch.

The country was apparently infested by these huge Carnivora, for after
three other attempts to land and cook our food we were forced to
abandon the idea entirely, as each time we were driven off by hunting
tigers.

It was also equally impossible to obtain the necessary ingredients for
our chemical fuel, and, as we had very little left aboard, we
determined to step our folding mast and proceed under sail, hoarding
our fuel supply for use in emergencies.

I may say that it was with no regret that we bid adieu to Tigerland, as
we rechristened the ancient Devon, and, beating out into the Channel,
turned the launchl’s nose southeast, to round Bolt Head and continue up
the coast toward the Strait of Dover and the North Sea.

I was determined to reach London as soon as possible, that we might
obtain fresh clothing, meet with cultured people, and learn from the
lips of Englishmen the secrets of the two centuries since the East had
been divorced from the West.

Our first stopping place was the Isle of Wight. We entered the Solent
about ten o’clock one morning, and I must confess that my heart sank as
we came close to shore. No lighthouse was visible, though one was
plainly indicated upon my map. Upon neither shore was sign of human
habitation. We skirted the northern shore of the island in fruitless
search for man, and then at last landed upon an eastern point, where
Newport should have stood, but where only weeds and great trees and
tangled wild wood rioted, and not a single manmade thing was visible to
the eye.

Before landing, I had the men substitute soft bullets for the
steel-jacketed projectiles with which their belts and magazines were
filled. Thus equipped, we felt upon more even terms with the tigers,
but there was no sign of the tigers, and I decided that they must be
confined to the mainland.

After eating, we set out in search of fuel, leaving Taylor to guard the
launch. For some reason I could not trust Snider alone. I knew that he
looked with disapproval upon my plan to visit England, and I did not
know but what at his first opportunity, he might desert us, taking the
launch with him, and attempt to return to Pan-America.

That he would be fool enough to venture it, I did not doubt.

We had gone inland for a mile or more, and were passing through a
park-like wood, when we came suddenly upon the first human beings we
had seen since we sighted the English coast.

There were a score of men in the party. Hairy, half-naked men they
were, resting in the shade of a great tree. At the first sight of us
they sprang to their feet with wild yells, seizing long spears that had
lain beside them as they rested.

For a matter of fifty yards they ran from us as rapidly as they could,
and then they turned and surveyed us for a moment. Evidently emboldened
by the scarcity of our numbers, they commenced to advance upon us,
brandishing their spears and shouting horribly.

They were short and muscular of build, with long hair and beards
tangled and matted with filth. Their heads, however, were shapely, and
their eyes, though fierce and warlike, were intelligent.

Appreciation of these physical attributes came later, of course, when I
had better opportunity to study the men at close range and under
circumstances less fraught with danger and excitement. At the moment I
saw, and with unmixed wonder, only a score of wild savages charging
down upon us, where I had expected to find a community of civilized and
enlightened people.

Each of us was armed with rifle, revolver, and cutlass, but as we stood
shoulder to shoulder facing the wild men I was loath to give the
command to fire upon them, inflicting death or suffering upon strangers
with whom we had no quarrel, and so I attempted to restrain them for
the moment that we might parley with them.

To this end I raised my left hand above my head with the palm toward
them as the most natural gesture indicative of peaceful intentions
which occurred to me. At the same time I called aloud to them that we
were friends, though, from their appearance, there was nothing to
indicate that they might understand Pan-American, or ancient English,
which are of course practically identical.

At my gesture and words they ceased their shouting and came to a halt a
few paces from us. Then, in deep tones, one who was in advance of the
others and whom I took to be the chief or leader of the party replied
in a tongue which while intelligible to us, was so distorted from the
English language from which it evidently had sprung, that it was with
difficulty that we interpreted it.

“Who are you,” he asked, “and from what country?”

I told him that we were from Pan-America, but he only shook his head
and asked where that was. He had never heard of it, or of the Atlantic
Ocean which I told him separated his country from mine.

“It has been two hundred years,” I told him, “since a Pan-American
visited England.”

“England?” he asked. “What is England?”

“Why this is a part of England!” I exclaimed.

“This is Grubitten,” he assured me. “I know nothing about England, and
I have lived here all my life.”

It was not until long after that the derivation of Grubitten occurred
to me. Unquestionably it is a corruption of Great Britain, a name
formerly given to the large island comprising England, Scotland and
Wales. Subsequently we heard it pronounced Grabrittin and Grubritten.

I then asked the fellow if he could direct us to Ryde or Newport; but
again he shook his head, and said that he never had heard of such
countries. And when I asked him if there were any cities in this
country he did not know what I meant, never having heard the word
cities.

I explained my meaning as best I could by stating that by city I
referred to a place where many people lived together in houses.

“Oh,” he exclaimed, “you mean a camp! Yes, there are two great camps
here, East Camp and West Camp. We are from East Camp.”

The use of the word camp to describe a collection of habitations
naturally suggested war to me, and my next question was as to whether
the war was over, and who had been victorious.

“No,” he replied to this question. “The war is not yet over. But it
soon will be, and it will end, as it always does, with the Westenders
running away. We, the Eastenders, are always victorious.”

“No,” I said, seeing that he referred to the petty tribal wars of his
little island, “I mean the Great War, the war with Germany. Is it
ended—and who was victorious?”

He shook his head impatiently.

“I never heard,” he said, “of any of these strange countries of which
you speak.”

It seemed incredible, and yet it was true. These people living at the
very seat of the Great War knew nothing of it, though but two centuries
had passed since, to our knowledge, it had been running in the height
of its titanic frightfulness all about them, and to us upon the far
side of the Atlantic still was a subject of keen interest.

Here was a lifelong inhabitant of the Isle of Wight who never had heard
of either Germany or England! I turned to him quite suddenly with a new
question.

“What people live upon the mainland?” I asked, and pointed in the
direction of the Hants coast.

“No one lives there,” he replied.

“Long ago, it is said, my people dwelt across the waters upon that
other land; but the wild beasts devoured them in such numbers that
finally they were driven here, paddling across upon logs and driftwood,
nor has any dared return since, because of the frightful creatures
which dwell in that horrid country.”

“Do no other peoples ever come to your country in ships?” I asked.

He never heard the word ship before, and did not know its meaning. But
he assured me that until we came he had thought that there were no
other peoples in the world other than the Grubittens, who consist of
the Eastenders and the Westenders of the ancient Isle of Wight.

Assured that we were inclined to friendliness, our new acquaintances
led us to their village, or, as they call it, camp. There we found a
thousand people, perhaps, dwelling in rude shelters, and living upon
the fruits of the chase and such sea food as is obtainable close to
shore, for they had no boats, nor any knowledge of such things.

Their weapons were most primitive, consisting of rude spears tipped
with pieces of metal pounded roughly into shape. They had no
literature, no religion, and recognized no law other than the law of
might. They produced fire by striking a bit of flint and steel
together, but for the most part they ate their food raw. Marriage is
unknown among them, and while they have the word, mother, they did not
know what I meant by “father.” The males fight for the favor of the
females. They practice infanticide, and kill the aged and physically
unfit.

The family consists of the mother and the children, the men dwelling
sometimes in one hut and sometimes in another. Owing to their bloody
duels, they are always numerically inferior to the women, so there is
shelter for them all.

We spent several hours in the village, where we were objects of the
greatest curiosity. The inhabitants examined our clothing and all our
belongings, and asked innumerable questions concerning the strange
country from which we had come and the manner of our coming.

I questioned many of them concerning past historical events, but they
knew nothing beyond the narrow limits of their island and the savage,
primitive life they led there. London they had never heard of, and they
assured me that I would find no human beings upon the mainland.

Much saddened by what I had seen, I took my departure from them, and
the three of us made our way back to the launch, accompanied by about
five hundred men, women, girls, and boys.

As we sailed away, after procuring the necessary ingredients of our
chemical fuel, the Grubittens lined the shore in silent wonder at the
strange sight of our dainty craft dancing over the sparkling waters,
and watched us until we were lost to their sight.




CHAPTER IV.


It was during the morning of July 6, 2137, that we entered the mouth of
the Thames—to the best of my knowledge the first Western keel to cut
those historic waters for two hundred and twenty-one years!

But where were the tugs and the lighters and the barges, the lightships
and the buoys, and all those countless attributes which went to make up
the myriad life of the ancient Thames?

Gone! All gone! Only silence and desolation reigned where once the
commerce of the world had centered.

I could not help but compare this once great water-way with the waters
about our New York, or Rio, or San Diego, or Valparaiso. They had
become what they are today during the two centuries of the profound
peace which we of the navy have been prone to deplore. And what, during
this same period, had shorn the waters of the Thames of their pristine
grandeur?

Militarist that I am, I could find but a single word of
explanation—war!

I bowed my head and turned my eyes downward from the lonely and
depressing sight, and in a silence which none of us seemed willing to
break, we proceeded up the deserted river.

We had reached a point which, from my map, I imagined must have been
about the former site of Erith, when I discovered a small band of
antelope a short distance inland. As we were now entirely out of meat
once more, and as I had given up all expectations of finding a city
upon the site of ancient London, I determined to land and bag a couple
of the animals.

Assured that they would be timid and easily frightened, I decided to
stalk them alone, telling the men to wait at the boat until I called to
them to come and carry the carcasses back to the shore.

Crawling carefully through the vegetation, making use of such trees and
bushes as afforded shelter, I came at last almost within easy range of
my quarry, when the antlered head of the buck went suddenly into the
air, and then, as though in accordance with a prearranged signal, the
whole band moved slowly off, farther inland.

As their pace was leisurely, I determined to follow them until I came
again within range, as I was sure that they would stop and feed in a
short time.

They must have led me a mile or more at least before they again halted
and commenced to browse upon the rank, luxuriant grasses. All the time
that I had followed them I had kept both eyes and ears alert for sign
or sound that would indicate the presence of Felis tigris; but so far
not the slightest indication of the beast had been apparent.

As I crept closer to the antelope, sure this time of a good shot at a
large buck, I suddenly saw something that caused me to forget all about
my prey in wonderment.

It was the figure of an immense grey-black creature, rearing its
colossal shoulders twelve or fourteen feet above the ground. Never in
my life had I seen such a beast, nor did I at first recognize it, so
different in appearance is the live reality from the stuffed, unnatural
specimens preserved to us in our museums.

But presently I guessed the identity of the mighty creature as Elephas
africanus, or, as the ancients commonly described it, African elephant.

The antelope, although in plain view of the huge beast, paid not the
slightest attention to it, and I was so wrapped up in watching the
mighty pachyderm that I quite forgot to shoot at the buck and
presently, and in quite a startling manner, it became impossible to do
so.

The elephant was browsing upon the young and tender shoots of some low
bushes, waving his great ears and switching his short tail. The
antelope, scarce twenty paces from him, continued their feeding, when
suddenly, from close beside the latter, there came a most terrifying
roar, and I saw a great, tawny body shoot, from the concealing verdure
beyond the antelope, full upon the back of a small buck.

Instantly the scene changed from one of quiet and peace to
indescribable chaos. The startled and terrified buck uttered cries of
agony. His fellows broke and leaped off in all directions. The elephant
raised his trunk, and, trumpeting loudly, lumbered off through the
wood, crushing down small trees and trampling bushes in his mad flight.

Growling horribly, a huge lion stood across the body of his prey—such a
creature as no Pan-American of the twenty-second century had ever
beheld until my eyes rested upon this lordly specimen of “the king of
beasts.” But what a different creature was this fierce-eyed demon,
palpitating with life and vigor, glossy of coat, alert, growling,
magnificent, from the dingy, moth-eaten replicas beneath their glass
cases in the stuffy halls of our public museums.

I had never hoped or expected to see a living lion, tiger, or
elephant—using the common terms that were familiar to the ancients,
since they seem to me less unwieldy than those now in general use among
us—and so it was with sentiments not unmixed with awe that I stood
gazing at this regal beast as, above the carcass of his kill, he roared
out his challenge to the world.

So enthralled was I by the spectacle that I quite forgot myself, and
the better to view him, the great lion, I had risen to my feet and
stood, not fifty paces from him, in full view.

For a moment he did not see me, his attention being