The Project Gutenberg eBook of Take Me for a Ride: Coming of Age in a Destructive Cult
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

*** This is a COPYRIGHTED Project Gutenberg eBook. Details Below. ***
***     Please follow the copyright guidelines in this file.      ***


Title: Take Me for a Ride: Coming of Age in a Destructive Cult

Author: Mark E. Laxer


        
Release date: September 1, 1994 [eBook #162]
                Most recently updated: April 27, 2020

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/162


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TAKE ME FOR A RIDE: COMING OF AGE IN A DESTRUCTIVE CULT ***













TAKE ME FOR A RIDE

Coming Of Age In A Destructive Cult

by Mark E. Laxer

Copyright 1993 by Mark E. Laxer







Take Me For A Ride

* * *

     One flew east,
     One flew west,
     One flew over the
               cuckoo's nest.

                   --Childhood nursery rhyme
                     quoted in One Flew Over The Cuckoo's Nest
                     by Ken Kesey


     Fly me over the cuckoo's nest,
     To your *golden* side,
     I don't care if you're the cuckoo--
     Take me for a ride...

                   --Agni

TAKE ME FOR A RIDE Coming Of Age In A Destructive Cult

by Mark E. Laxer

1993 Outer Rim Press Copyright 1993 by Mark E. Laxer

No part of this book may be reproduced in any manner without written
permission from the publisher, unless the intent is to benefit humankind.

Reviews:

“While his portrait of a charismatic leader’s slide into madness is gripping,
perhaps more important here is Laxer’s disclosure of some of the motives
impelling young people to immerse themselves in cults…the work is well
written.”

--Library Journal

“This is a very important work…It is today’s Darkness at Noon…”

--Herb Rosedale, President, American Family Foundation

“One of the most important books written for a very vulnerable population.”

--Roberta Davis, WRCT-FM, Squirrel Hill, Pittsburgh

“Mark Laxer does a great service in his deeply personal portrayal of life
within a cult. His struggle to attain independence…is a poignant quest of a
seeking spirit.”

--Jacob Longacre, Lutheran Minister

“All students of human nature will delight in Mark Laxer’s insightful story of
his personal journey into a new kind of American cult that interweaves
pseudo-spiritual goals with money making, computer, hi-technology ambitions. He
shows us the subtle techniques used to seduce bright college students and
graduates into this cult and the powerful forces that bind members to their
charismatic leader. My students have enjoyed the narrative and learned much
from this analysis of the psychology of cult indoctrination in Take Me For A
Ride.”

--Dr. Philip Zimbardo, Stanford University, Initiator of the Stanford Prison
Experiment

Update:

After weathering a $30 million lawsuit meant to silence his ‘Take Me For A
Ride: Coming of Age in a Destructive Cult’ (1993), Mark Laxer went on to write
‘The Monkey Bible’ (2010) with companion rock opera The Line by Eric Maring
and ‘Rama Trauma Trump: I Left the Cult and Now Look What Happened’ (2020) - a
nonfiction graphic novel illustrated by Marcie Vallette. Contact author for
free digital copies of aforementioned books and rock opera.

Additional resources:

--Free audio of ‘Take Me For A Ride: Coming of Age in a Destructive Cult’ read
by the author on the Mark Laxer youtube channel, in the Take Me For A Ride
playlist

--Subscribe to Mark Laxer and TheMonkeyBible youtube channel for latest

--Follow author on twitter.com/marklaxer and instagram.com/mark.laxer

--Contact author through mark.laxer profile facebook page

--Follow author on facebook through thetravelerscircle or themonkeybible or
vEcotourism

--For physical copies of books, search your online bookseller or check
with your local librarian

Grateful acknowledgment is made to Simon & Schuster,
Inc., for permission to reprint an excerpt from Gandhi:
A Memoir by William Shirer.  Copyright (c) 1979 by William Shirer.

Library of Congress Catalog Card Number:  93-085777

ISBN 0-9638108-3-9

Initially printed and posted in the United States of America

To Patsy Sims--inspired teacher, intriguing storyteller,
intrepid journalist.

Author's Note

Names in the following story have been changed, except for those
already mentioned in the press.

Contents

1.    Bicycle Ride--Walden
2.    Zapped!
3.    The Joining
4.    The Community
5.    Bicycle Ride--Lenox
6.    The Garden
7.    Money Mantra
8.    Fast Leader
9.    Off The Map
10.   Bicycle Ride--Utica
11.   Displaced
12.   Thwarted Escape
13.   Breakdown
14.   Bicycle Ride--St. Ignes
15.   The Enchanted Taco
16.   Ride To Heaven
17.   On High
18.   Where's My Tribe?
19.   I'm Okay
20.   The Last Supper
21.   Bicycle Ride--The Continental Divide
    Epilogue

Appendix A:    Excerpts From WOOF!
Appendix B:    Excerpts From "Welcome To Lakshmi"
Appendix C:    Excerpts From "Sophisticated Sexuality"
Appendix D:    Excerpts From Rama's Ads and Brochures




1.  Bicycle Ride--Walden


After I left Rama's inner circle in 1985, I occasionally bicycled
to Walden Pond, where I read about Thoreau's experiment with
self-reliance. My seven years in the cult of Rama--Dr. Frederick Lenz,
who was known early on as Atmananda--had deeply shaken my confidence.
Atmananda often assured me that I was possessed by Negative Forces,
that I was barely able to function in the real world, and that I
was fortunate he did not drop me off at a mental institution.
I met him in 1978, when I was seventeen.

Thoreau helped me recall a time, before Atmananda, when I was strong
and self-reliant. I had been an avid cyclist.  Pedaling thousands
of miles each year helped strengthen both my legs and self-esteem.
Throughout my teenage years bicycling and self-confidence were
inextricably linked, and I grew to believe I could ride anywhere,
under any conditions.  I tried to approach life with a similar gusto,
which may explain why, in 1979, Atmananda invited me to move with him
to southern California to start a spiritual centre.  From 1979 to 1981,
I lived with him by the cliffs of La Jolla where I witnessed his
rise to power.  Today, in 1993, he controls the minds of several
hundred computer consultants, businessmen, doctors, and lawyers.
Each year he extracts from them roughly ten million dollars.

As I gazed at Walden Pond in search of calm, the wind spawned new waves,
and the surface swelled with complexity.  I recalled what Atmananda
had said after I returned from a five-day bike trip in California.
He announced in front of other disciples that my aura was dark.
He also said that I had been attacked by nocturnal,
mountain-dwelling Entities which "cause neurosis and psychosis,
obliterate lifetimes of spiritual evolution, and can possess
your soul."

Atmananda's Entity-prevention program included studying with a
fully enlightened teacher, meditating regularly, and avoiding
solitary excursions into nature.  Yet in the spring of 1986,
nearly one year after I left him, I reminded myself that I would
rather be possessed in my world than potentially perfect in his.
I planned to pedal across America not with an exorcist, but with
a puppy.

On May 31, 1986, as warm, moist air pushed pockets of fog over Walden Pond,
I lifted the four-month-old Siberian husky, Nunatak, into the
doggie-carrier. The carrier rested on top of the bicycle trailer,
attached to the frame of my 12-speed. Strong headwinds soon strained
my muscles, shook the lush canopy of foliage, and pelted me with
large drops of rain.  As I began the journey west, the front tire
raced through puddles while my mind raced through painful memories
and questions.  How had my years with Atmananda affected me?  Why was
it so difficult to leave him?  What was it about my past that led me to him?




2.  Zapped!


"Lights," said my father and for a moment, except for the
phosphorescent hands of the clock on the wall, the room went black.
With a flip of a switch, he suddenly reappeared:  a tall,
thin man with thick glasses, standing beside the glowing enlarger.
As a child I sat for hours under a dim yellow light,
mesmerized by images appearing on paper submerged in trays filled
with smelly liquid.  Yellow, my father taught me, has no apparent
effect on the light-sensitive specks coating photographic paper.

The unorthodox images which leapt from the walls of our house seemed
as eerie as the darkroom experience itself:  there was a photograph
of a llama's head as viewed through a distorting fish-eye lens,
there was a photograph of a shredded poster of a man's face,
and there were many abstract photos which seemed to defy description.
My father, a production manager at a New York publishing company,
perhaps saw the world in a different light than his peers.

My mother was an elementary school teacher with black hair and
sometimes kind, sometimes intense eyes.  A generous and caring woman,
she put her career on hold for more than a decade to raise a family.
She met my father in upstate New York on a hike sponsored by an
outing club.

When I was fourteen, I sensed that my father was growing tired,
detached, and depressed, but I did not understand why.  He expressed
abstractions better than emotions, and found it difficult to vent
the angers and frustrations which had accumulated from work and from home.

Nor did I understand that my mother freely gave to me what she,
in her youth, had sorely missed:  love.  Oblivious to the magnitude
of her workload--she taught full-time and was pursuing a Master's degree--
I grew angry with her as a teenager partly because she seemed
insecure and overbearing, and partly because she expected me,
my brother, and my father to help keep the house clean in the way
that she wanted.

Despite my family's love for the outdoors, for our dog,
and for one another, the emotional fabric that bound us together
often seemed on the verge of ripping apart.  And the problems
only intensified as my brother and I grew older.

Two-and-a-half-years my elder, my brother was an avid backpacker
and rock climber with jet-black hair, Gandhi glasses, and a gentle
but determined disposition.  He too felt that something in our family
was "out of whack," and we occasionally discussed what we would
do when we left home.  But unlike me, he had no one to buffer him
from my parents who, I was starting to discover, were only human.

I was a sensitive child.  I was so sensitive that the sounds of someone
chewing made me upset.  I was a light sleeper.  I was also a slob,
a knee-jerk rebel, and something of a nerd when it came to doing
things like making friends with girls.  Nonetheless, I decided
that I could work out whatever I needed to work out in a healthier
environment than at home; the countdown to the last day of high school,
after which I planned to set out on my own, began when I was
around fifteen.  Meanwhile, I read a lot and spent time with friends,
some of whom also enjoyed hiking and bicycling.

In the summer of 1976, when I was sixteen, I bicycled from the White
Mountains of New Hampshire to Boston with people from an outing club.
One morning, as I watched my traveling companions prepare their daily dose
of hallucinogens, I realized that I wanted to be part of their fellowship.
The desire, however, was checked by a gut-level impulse to avoid drugs,
so Jim, a sinewy guy stooped over a pot of boiling morning glory seeds,
turned me on instead to The Teachings of Don Juan:  A Yaqui Way
of Knowledge.  This was a popular account of Carlos Castaneda's
purported apprenticeship with Yaqui Indian medicine man Juan Matus,
or Don Juan.

From the cover of the book peered a menacing and surreal painting
of a crow.

"But a crow isn't always a crow," said Jim softly, paraphrasing Don
Juan as he stirred the seeds.  "Sometimes it's a powerful sorcerer
in disguise."

Intrigued by the paradox of the crow, I plowed through The Teachings of Don
Juan and through Castaneda's A Separate Reality and Journey To Ixtlan.
At summer's end, still drugless and clueless as to whether crows
were birds or sorcerers, I left Boston clutching a Castaneda book.

Back in New York, I chose to see the world less through the eyes
of an eleventh grader taking honors physics and history,
and more through the eyes of a sorcerer's apprentice.
I incorporated into my daily routine Don Juan's recommendations.
As an exercise in humility, I spoke aloud to plants.  To *see* beyond
society's description of reality, I tried to stop my thoughts.
To expand my awareness beyond the confines of the waking state,
I sought to wake within a dream.

My interest in what lay beyond the scope of traditional reality led
to an interest in what lay beyond the scope of traditional education,
and, that fall, I thought about switching to a public experimental
high school founded in the late '60s.  I firmly believed that I
would thrive in a world without grades, attendance taking, tests,
and requirements.  In January, 1977, with the guidance of my brother,
I managed to persuade my reluctant parents to let me join.

I chose to continue taking physics and history at the traditional school;
other subjects I took at the non-traditional school where,
in a creative writing class, I wrote:



                  Teachers force us to perceive,
                  The surface world of reason:
                  "A tree is but a pole with leaves,
                  Whose habits change each season."



I thrived within a self-designed, academically rigorous educational program,
but experienced no breakthroughs in my search for Hidden Realms
of Perception until the following summer.  The experience came when I
was working ten-hour days and five-and-a-half day weeks on a farm
in southern New Hampshire.  In my spare time, I was designing
and building an electricity-producing windmill, which ended up
towering some twenty feet above Onyx, one of the tallest cows.
Farm-crew members sometimes walked out to the hay fields to get high.
One night, after smoking marijuana, I fell asleep and later saw,
above where I lay, a cow, its head swaying gently to and fro.
Though I thought I was awake it was but a dream, for when I woke
from "waking," the cow had disappeared.  This experience led me
to believe that like Mr. Castaneda's mentor, I could consciously
direct my actions within the context of a dream.

Back in New York, I became editor-in-chief of the high school newspaper.
I soon learned that I had a knack for inspiring and for managing
a team.  I was well regarded by my teachers and by my peers,
and I had many friends.  I could have continued my studies at
a prestigious university, but I longed for a mystical quest.
I dreamt that I walked silently across a vast desert plain.  I longed
to experience that which lay beyond the surface world of reason.
I dreamt that I flew over desert chaparral into an infinite orange horizon.
I longed for a wisdom that was secret, magical, ancient.  I decided
to hitchhike, alone, to the Sonoran Desert in Mexico to find
a mystical teacher, a *brujo*, who was just like Don Juan.  I planned
to leave on the day after high school graduation.

Meanwhile, I continued to read the Castaneda books and to experiment
with consciousness.  One time I attempted to raise my right arm
without consciously lifting it.  I wanted it to levitate on its own.
I soon felt a tingling in the arm, but it did not rise.  Finally, I lifted
it on purpose.  Then, as part of the experiment, I suggested to myself
that the arm remain lifted.  As long as I repeated the suggestion,
the arm remained where it was.  Afterwards, I could not recall
how long the state of mind had lasted.

My brother shared with me an interest in rising above the limitations
of home, school, religion, society, and reality.  By the time
I turned him on to the Castaneda books, he had already studied
Einstein's special theory of relativity and The Tao Of Physics.
In the spring of 1978, when he was studying physics at the State
University of New York at Stony Brook, he told me that he had met
an English professor who was an expert on the Castaneda books.
He knew that my quest for a teacher would begin in roughly two months,
when I would graduate from high school.  He wanted to help me.
He suggested that I attend the Castaneda expert's free lecture series on
meditation in Manhattan.

I wondered why a Castaneda expert would live on Long Island rather
than in a remote desert in Mexico, but my brother's enthusiasm
was sincere.  "Besides," I thought as we rode the train into the city,
"anything I learn now will only help me on the journey."

We arrived at a building on 33rd Street.  A rickety elevator took
us to the third floor, where the sweet and spicy aroma of incense
wafted through the air.  I saw a row of sneakers by the elevator
door and wondered if they had been responsible for the incense.
After placing our sneakers in line with the others, we walked past
a sign which read "Yoga Life Perfection."  A young woman with long,
black hair and a playful, impish grin sold books and incense in
the hallway.  She recognized my brother and smiled at us.  She wore
a sari.

We entered a medium-sized room where a smoldering stick
of incense and two unlit candles rested on a table up front.
Two young women stood together near the back of the room.
One had long brown hair and dreamy eyes.  The other had a face
and figure like a model.  Their faces were flushed and aglow.
They also wore saris.

"Too bad I'm not gonna be sticking around New York," I thought,
gazing at them.

In the audience sat two women in their sixties, dressed entirely
in black.  They sat near a man in his thirties, with the frame
of a metal pyramid resting squarely on his head.

We sat by the two sari-clad women.  They were clearly excited
about something.  They used words like inspiration, aspiration,
concentration, visualization, meditation, reincarnation, and perfection.
My brother, too, seemed excited, as if something extraordinary
and wonderful were about to occur.  With each passing minute,
I found myself growing more curious, more impatient, and more excited.
Fifteen minutes after the talk was scheduled to begin, the women
in saris stopped talking and looked up.

I looked up too and saw a tall man with a projecting nose and
lush locks.  His long strides seemed synchronized with his arms,
which swung like perfectly conflicting pendulums; this motion
seemed to propel him into the room.  He sat on the table facing
the audience, folded his legs in the pretzel-like posture seen
in Buddha statues, and introduced himself as Dr. Frederick Lenz.
He explained that he had another name:  Atmananda.  Then he lit
the candles and asked us to drop our preconceived notions because,
"meditation is beyond thought."

"Thought is like a car," he said in a smooth, charming voice.
"You can drive it to California.  But if you want to cross the ocean,
you will need an alternate means of transportation.  If you want
to cross the sea of consciousness, you will need meditation."

Though his metaphors were new to me, they seemed to point
the way beyond the surface world of reason.  He used words
like guru, avatar, warrior, power, power spots, personal power,
moments of power, spiritual power, psychic power, ecstasy, enlightenment,
cosmic love, transcendental, supreme, Nirvana, and the Infinite.
When he said it was time to meditate, I was surprised
that he had been speaking for over forty minutes.  It had seemed like five.

"Now extend your index fingers and close your eyes," Atmananda instructed.

I squinted to see if anyone else was peeking.  From what I could tell,
the twenty or so people obeyed him.

"Now say 'me' out loud and touch your chest."

My "me" was muffled by the group's "me".

"You are not only pointing to your chest," Atmananda explained,
"but to your heart chakra, one of seven psychic energy centers
associated with the subtle body.  Concentrating on a chakra is an easy
way to begin crossing the sea of consciousness."

So we sat there, drifting, and though I tried to stop my thoughts
and feel the throbbing pulse of my heart chakra, I found myself
checking out the women in saris.

"Very good," he said after about five minutes.  Then he suggested
that we sit back, relax, and ask questions.

There was something hauntingly familiar about this confident,
well-spoken, young professor.  Perhaps it was the way his chin
jutted forward, the rich timbre of his voice, or his seeming
interest in helping people that reminded me of the cartoon character
Dudley-Do-Right. I felt drawn to him.  I found myself staring into
his full moon, gripping eyes.  I found myself seeking his attention.

"Can a person be healed by meditating?"  I asked, only partly
concerned that I had a cold.

He locked my attention with those eyes...I felt slightly dizzy...it
was not unpleasant...it felt as though I were floating...my vision
blurred...things went fuzzy and white...it appeared as though it
were snowing...

"Am I having a vision?"  I wondered and immediately the "snow" vanished.
Just then Atmananda seemed unreal, like a superhero from a cosmic
comic-strip that had been cut, enlarged, and inserted into the room.
When he smiled at me, I had the uncanny sense that he knew what I
had felt and seen.  Then he left, flanked by the women in saris.




3.  The Joining


In the days following Atmananda's talk, I longed to know if my vision
of the "snow" had been a mystical experience, an optical illusion,
or a figment of my imagination.  Graduation was only weeks away.
I assumed that Atmananda would help me solve the mystery, and I counted
the days until his next public lecture.

I did not tell my friends much about Atmananda.  They seemed content,
even after reading the Castaneda books, to view the world through a
rational framework.  In contrast, I grew excited about the possibility
of transcending the world of reason altogether.  They were proud
of their letters of acceptance from the Harvards and the Princetons.
I was proud of my letter of acceptance from The School Of Mysticism.
My letter arrived in the form of brilliant white specks which swirled
about me like snow.

Nor did I tell my parents, who represented discord, anxiety,
and manipulation--the opposite of what Atmananda seemed to stand for.

Instead, I spoke with my brother.  He and I were close.
I wanted to be just like him.  He used words such as disciples,
selfless-service, humanity, humility, purity, soul, soul-mate,
past-lives, karma, fast track, and cosmic evolution.  He got
excited when he talked about Atmananda.  He told me that he too
had experienced perceptual distortion during Atmananda's talks.
We returned to "Yoga Life Perfection."

About thirty minutes after the talk was scheduled to begin,
Atmananda strode through the door.  He wore a light brown suit.

"Anne," he said, "did you bring the Transcendental?"

The sari-clad woman who had sold incense at the last lecture
placed a frame on the table beside Atmananda.  The Transcendental
was a photograph of Atmananda's Indian guru, Chinmoy.  But it
was so underexposed that it seemed not a picture of a guru,
but rather a mug-shot of a ghost with high cheekbones.
It reminded me of one of the experimental images which had emerged
from my father's darkroom.

"The Transcendental portrays Guru in his highest
transcendental consciousness," my brother told me.

Atmananda scanned the audience, mostly women in their sixties.
Then he began to lecture, not on meditation, but on reincarnation,
which he had done many times before.

"Maya, or illusion, eclipses the original perfection of the soul,"
he said.  "The soul reincarnates over thousands of lessons known
as lifetimes."

I could not recall learning about reincarnation at Hebrew school.

"As the soul evolves, it transcends desire and attachment,
which is the root of all suffering.  Finally, enlightenment occurs."

Unaware that he was borrowing Hindu and Buddhist doctrine, and intrigued
but not convinced that in a future life I would attain enlightenment,
I kept one eye on Atmananda and the other on Anne.

"Everything can be classified according to its level of
spiritual evolution.  Rocks and minerals are very primitive,
whereas plants have more developed auras.  After thousands of years,
the soul seeks an animal incarnation.  Except in rare instances,
enlightenment occurs through the human form only."

I grinned and wiggled my thumbs, figuring I was already ahead
of the game.

"Humans in their early incarnations are responsible for many of
the world's problems.  But evolved people are not better than others.
Are college students any better than third graders?"

This diffused my concern that Atmananda's line of reasoning justified
the formation of an evolved elite.

"Karma is a cosmic feedback mechanism triggered by past actions.
In a universe governed by karma, few experiences are coincidental."

I supposed a lottery winner could have been a generous philanthropist
in a past life.  But remembering the various times I had been
robbed while growing up in New York, I doubted that I had spent
incarnations as a mugger.  Still, I liked his contention that it
was karma's role not to punish, but to educate.

"After thousands of human incarnations, you become ready to study with
an enlightened teacher.  You may suddenly notice a teacher's poster.
You may have seen the poster many times before--only this time
something *clicks*."

I looked at the Transcendental and wondered if the Guru, who looked
like he badly needed sleep, could make something in me *click*.

Atmananda turned toward me, as if in response to my newest doubt,
and said, "An enlightened teacher can take a person through thousands
of lives in just one lifetime."

"What's the rush?"  I thought.

"The sooner you attain enlightenment, the sooner you can help
others transcend this world of pain and suffering."

"How did he do that?"  I wondered, unsure if he were addressing
typical doubts, or if he were actually reading my mind.

Atmananda continued to look at me.  I found myself gazing,
without blinking, into his eyes...I began to feel as if I were
floating... somewhere far away I sensed my body breathing...I
heard "bzzzzzzzz" droning on and on and on...

He turned away, and I returned to normal consciousness.

"Holy cow," I thought.  "He did it again!"  Suddenly, I imagined
that he was a sorcerer and I, his apprentice.  I forgot about Anne
and carefully followed his words.

"Advanced seekers say that after they attain enlightenment they
will return to earth to help others.  But most of them end up
choosing eternal ecstasy instead."

I vowed to come back and help the downtrodden.

"It is even rarer for fully enlightened souls to return," he said,
pointing out that his Guru was fully enlightened.

Fully enlightened souls, Atmananda explained, were aware
of those who meditated sincerely on their photograph.
Atmananda then instructed us to meditate on the Transcendental.
After about ten minutes of silence he asked, "Who saw the light
around Guru?"

One woman shot up her hand.  Then another.  I admitted to myself
that I thought I saw the photo glow.

"Guru flooded you with light from another world," he explained.
Then, inviting the audience to experience the "advanced" side of
self-discovery, he told us about Chinmoy's free weekly meditations
at St. Paul's Chapel, Columbia University.

By this time, in keeping with Atmananda's suggestions,
my brother had applied to study with Chinmoy.  He was accepted.
He lived near the State University of New York at Stony Brook,
near the eight or so Chinmoy disciples, near Atmananda.  When I asked
him to take me to his Guru, he said that he would.

We met at our parents' home.  He wore all white clothes.
"White symbolizes purity--the spiritual quality men need to develop most,"
he explained, quoting Chinmoy.  "Wearing white only adds one or two
percent more purity to your consciousness, but every bit helps."

My mother came into the room and looked at my brother.

"Uh-oh," I thought.  I felt bad for my mother.  She typically
had to deal with me and my brother on her own.  Perhaps in
anticipation of an ulcer condition, my father tended to avoid
so-called family discussions.  "If only she would leave us alone,"
I figured, "she would not get so bent out of shape."

I also felt bad for my brother.  Everything he did, it seemed,
aggravated my parents.  "They should support him in his spiritual quest,"
I decided.

Now my mother looked upset.  I did not know it then, but she was
not upset that her sons were interested in yoga.  In her youth she
had satisfied a similar interest in the East by taking a course on
Gandhi's philosophy.  She grew concerned, however, when she realized
that we were intensely focusing on one person--on a living guru.

"Where are you boys going?" she asked.

"It's okay, Mom," I replied, assuming my role as mediator.
"We're just going to a talk on relaxation and meditation--you know,
stuff like that."  I had already told her about Chinmoy and Atmananda
("Mom, I think I found a teacher right here in New York!"). But she
wanted to know more.  She looked hurt.

"You're upset about relaxation and meditation?"  I said, trying my
best to reason with her.  "This is nothing, Mom.  What are you
going to say when I hitchhike to Mexico to study with a *brujo*?"

The silence that ensued bore with it all the weight
of a mother's love, hope, and fear for her sons.

We said good-bye and rode to the city.

"I mean, I have to lead my own life," I thought, and focused
on my parents' shortcomings to offset pangs of guilt.

Manhattan's ivy-league citadel of the intellect seemed an unlikely
spot for people to be led beyond thought.  But then, finding a
guru with an enlightened soul uptown seemed no less likely than
meeting a sorcerer with a Ph.D. downtown.  We switched at Grand
Central Station to an uptown train and emerged at 125th Street.
The clatter of subway cars gave way to traffic noise which faded once
we entered the Columbia University campus.  Soon we ascended steps
to St. Paul's Chapel.  Ahead of us were men with closely cropped
hair wearing all white clothes.  With hair clenched in braids,
the sari-wrapped women walked apart from the men--who were not looking
at them.  At the top of the stairs, dressed in a red tennis outfit,
stood Atmananda.

"Hi, Atmananda," said my brother, looking up.

With folded arms, Atmananda looked down and said, "Hello, Dan."

"You remember my kid brother?"

"Hello, kid brother."

Atmananda and I were roughly the same height, yet as disciples
flocked by him he seemed much taller.  I was again struck by
his piercing eyes, sharp nose, and thick crown of brown hair.
With such a countenance of nobility, he could have passed as a high
Roman senator or Greek god.

"Guru couldn't make it this week," he said.  "Why don't you go
in and meditate, and pick up on Guru's vibes?"

My brother and I went inside.  High above us on the massive chapel
dome were paintings of angels.  Perhaps it was the distant angels,
the two hundred or more silent disciples, and the rising scent
of sandalwood incense, that made me feel foreign and small.
We meditated for about five minutes and left.

Outside, Atmananda was speaking with a man in white, when it struck
me that he was wearing red.  "A non-conformist within a group
of non-conformists!" I thought.

He nodded to us but continued talking.

I walked by and noticed his name tag.  Directly beneath "ATMANANDA"
glimmered a sticker from AAA and this warning:  "Fasten Your Seat Belt."

That night, in the Castaneda books, I read how ordinary events
were often portentous omens.  I wondered if there was a significant
message hidden in the Guru's absence.  I wondered, too, if I
was supposed to meditate with this Guru before hitchhiking west.

The following week, I ventured with my brother to another of
Atmananda's lectures.  We also returned to meditate with Chinmoy.
When we arrived at Columbia, disciples were arranging flowers,
lighting incense, and otherwise darting about in preparation
for their master's presence.  Chinmoy apparently was on his way.
Several minutes later a short, stocky Indian entered the chapel.
He had a shiny head, a hooked nose, and high cheek bones.  He was draped
in a light-blue dhoti, the male version of a sari.  He walked slowly
toward the front.  He sat in a big blue chair, opened his eyes wide,
and blinked a couple of times.

Disciples in the audience sat with their hands folded, as if they
were praying to him.

"Are they praying to him?"  I asked my brother.

"No," he whispered.  "They are aspiring to the Infinite in him."

The Guru sipped from a glass which he held with his pinky pointing out.

"Well," I thought.  "As long as they aren't praying to him."

Suddenly Chinmoy belted out, "Aummm.
Auuummmmmm.  Auuummmmmmmmmmmm."  After five
minutes of meditation, the Guru folded his hands and bowed to the audience.

My brother whispered, "He is offering his meditation to the Infinite
in us."

"That about evens the score," I thought, feeling better about
the whole business of guru worship.

Chinmoy signaled a disciple who placed a box of oranges before him.
He stood behind it and nodded to the audience, which began forming
a line.

At first I thought he was just giving out oranges.  But by filling
the fruits with spiritual light, my brother explained, the Guru
was really giving darshan.

One by one, the disciples looked into Chinmoy's eyes with
out-stretched hands.  When they received the darshan they touched
the orange to their heart chakra, bowed, and walked reverentially
back to the benches.

When it came my turn, I approached slowly so that people
would think I was spiritual.  "When Guru flickers his eyes,"
I recalled my brother telling me, "he is entering the perfect
awareness of Nirvakalpa Samadhi."  I looked up.  Chinmoy smiled,
flickered his eyes, and pulled from the box...nothing! He had run
out of oranges.

"An omen!"  I thought.  I was unsure, though, what the delay
exactly meant.  Nonetheless, I decided to take advantage of the situation.
I focused my gaze on Chinmoy.  Soon everything in the chapel, except for
his shiny face, seemed to disappear.  Then, borrowing a technique
from the Castaneda books, I squinted and crossed my eyes until Chinmoy
transformed into swirls of shimmering light.  "Wow!"  I thought.
For a moment, the distorted image before me reminded me of the Transcendental.

When Chinmoy came back into focus, he shot a glance at the side
of the chapel.  A disciple brought him a fresh crate.  After the
second flickering, I took the orange with both hands, touched it
to my heart chakra, and bowed.  I walked away feeling grateful.
A wave of joy washed over me.  I saw the disciples, including my brother
and Atmananda, gazing lovingly at Chinmoy.  I felt touched by a power
which seemed greater and more romantic than that of the world of reason.
"How many people get a gift from a *fully* enlightened guru?"
I wondered.

"Don't just stare at it," my brother reproved, explaining that
oranges were poor retainers of Spiritual Light.  "Eat it!"

Moments later, the Guru announced in a lilting voice,
"Atmananda, pleeeez bring."

Atmananda led the five or six potential initiates to the front
of the chapel.  He had found, inspired, and persuaded them through
his lectures.  While Atmananda watched the Guru initiate them,
he did not return to his seat.  Instead, he remained in front,
several feet away.

Chinmoy rapidly oscillated his eyes at the new recruits.  His eyes were
still flickering when he placed his hand on each of their foreheads.
When his eyes returned to normal, he flashed a smile at Atmananda,
at the new disciples, and at the rest of the audience.  Then he left
the chapel in a flurry of whites and saris.

As I watched him leave, I felt secure that he and Atmananda knew a lot
about the unknown.  I glanced across the room at the disciples.
I realized that I wanted to be part of their fellowship.

My brother and I found Atmananda outside, addressing a group
of Stony Brook Chinmoy disciples.

"Do you want to go with us to Au Natural?" he asked us.

At that moment I would have gone with him anywhere, partly because I
was not keen on going home, and partly because he was so compelling.
There was something about him that felt nurturing yet electric,
casual yet happening.

"Yes!" we chimed.

Atmananda organized rides, gave directions, warned us about
potholes and drunk drivers, and suggested that we maintain
a meditative consciousness, lest we lose the Guru's light.
Then he led us away from the other Chinmoy disciples, from the chapel,
from the campus, and onto the streets.

I watched the blur of city lights from the back of Atmananda's Saab,
which hurtled through the streets at a velocity close to that of a
New York taxi.  He skillfully avoided potholes and drunk drivers.
He told my brother of his plan to have Stony Brook disciples advertise
his free public lectures by placing posters in Manhattan.  I relaxed,
believing he was in control.

At Au Natural, a yogurt shop, Atmananda introduced me to the Stony
Brook disciples.  There were Anne, Dana, and Suzanne, the sari-clad
women from his lectures.  There was Tom, a dark-haired young
man who was as tall as Atmananda and who seemed easygoing.
There was Sal, a balding young man who seemed intense.  There were
other Chinmoy disciples milling around, but the Stony Brook group
stuck together.

I expected the conversation would be spiritual, seeing as how we
had just meditated with a fully enlightened guru.  To my surprise,
Atmananda and Tom recalled an episode from The Twilight Zone.

"And he totally disappeared."

"Into the fifth dimension."

"Yeah, he really got zapped."

That night, when I got home, I wondered if Atmananda should have been
more meditative.  But I recalled that Don Juan often acted absurd,
funny, and irreverent.  He did so to balance the utter seriousness
of The Path, as well as to shake up Castaneda's pre-conceived
notions of what it meant to be a seeker.  "Besides," I thought,
quoting Atmananda, "who says spirituality can't be fun?"

The following week, I wondered if Chinmoy would accept me as his disciple.
I asked my brother what my odds were.

"If you are drawn to Guru," he said, "the chances are you have studied
with him in past lives.  But if he sees that he's not the right
teacher for you, he'll guide you inwardly to the right one."

I wanted to believe what my brother and Atmananda had been telling me.
I wanted to believe that the Guru installed disciple-specific,
invisible channels through which peace, light, and bliss could,
if the disciple were receptive, inwardly flow.  Yet I was not sold
on the theory of reincarnation.  Nor was I convinced that Atmananda
was fully accurate when he claimed that Chinmoy was the Cosmic Boatman,
an avatar [incarnation of a Hindu deity], and the most advanced soul
ever to have incarnated anywhere in the entire universe.

"Why would the messiah live in Jamaica, Queens?"  I wondered.
But then I felt bad.  After all, the Buddha and Christ probably didn't
live in such fancy neighborhoods either.  I also realized that my doubts
were based on the premise of rationality, the very nature of which
Atmananda had taught me was limited, flawed, and often destructive.
"I suppose Chinmoy *could* be the Cosmic Boatman," I told myself
as part of a compromise.

Days later, after one of Atmananda's public lectures, I grew curious
about my earlier vision of the snow.  I asked Atmananda to explain.

"Your third eye chakra is opening up a bit," he explained
matter-of-factly. "You are seeing into another world.  It is not
unusual to have this type of experience if you have meditated in past lives."

"Thanks, Atmananda!"  I said.

"Sure, kid," he said, suggesting that I sit back and enjoy the process.

Except for occasional doubts, I had been enjoying the process.
I enjoyed hanging out with the Stony Brook disciples.  They were
not only fellow seekers, but they seemed to have a good time.
Atmananda, in particular, was fun to be around.  He sometimes made me
feel important and powerful.  I enjoyed his lectures, during which he
quoted The Bhagavad-Gita, The Bible, Jonathan Livingston Seagull,
Star Wars, Shakespeare, T.S. Eliot, Thoreau, Roethke, and Carlos Castaneda.
One time he even recited my favorite passage from the Castaneda books,
the one about traveling on paths that have heart.

Now convinced that I had found a home in Atmananda's world,
I decided to seek initiation from Chinmoy.

My mother knew that my involvement with the group was intensifying.
She had been trying to get me to talk to the rabbi.

"Why should I talk to the rabbi?"  I responded.

"Will you at least listen to what he has to say?"

But I had been listening to the rabbi since my bar mitzvah
four years ago and, frankly, I was not impressed.  A kind
and sometimes humorous man with a keen intellect, the rabbi
represented a religion which seemed less mystical than social.
He struck me as being extremely reasonable, if not a little dull.
In all the years I studied, sang, and prayed in his congregation,
not once, as I recall, did he capture my imagination.

"I don't want to talk to the rabbi," I had replied.

Now I told my mother that I wanted to become a disciple.

She grew quiet and pale.

I told her that I had had mystical experiences while meditating
with Chinmoy.  I did not tell her, nor did I acknowledge, that the
mystical experiences mostly occurred after I crossed or squinted
my eyes, or after I gazed at Chinmoy for two minutes or more.
I told her that Chinmoy was an enlightened guru, and that I
respected him greatly.  I did not tell her, nor did I acknowledge,
that my respect--my reverence--was shaped largely by Atmananda
and the other disciples.

I was convinced by these reasons.  So was my brother.  My parents
were not.

"Mark, would you please talk to the rabbi?"

I finally agreed to go.

When my brother, my mother, and I entered the book-filled office,
the rabbi's expression, accentuated by a bulbous nose and glasses,
was anything but humorous.

"Hello, Mrs. Laxer," he said.  "Hello, boys."

"Hello, rabbi."

He asked us if we were getting involved in another religion.

"No, rabbi," explained my brother.  "We are studying spiritual mysticism."

"We're just learning to meditate," I added.

"I see," he said.  He mentioned an obscure mystical sect within
the Jewish religion known as Cabalism.  But Judaism, he explained,
slowly, as though measuring each word, was based upon laws--
not direct mystical experience.  As he spoke, I recalled that Jewish
law had been passed down through the generations since the time
of Abraham and Isaac.  Chinmoy's teachings, I realized, also stemmed
from a tradition dating back thousands of years.  I found myself
picturing Chinmoy and Atmananda.  "They are such colorful characters,"
I thought.

I glanced at the rabbi.  He was saying something about the dangers
of mind control.  "The rabbi is so...plain," I decided.
I felt certain that he had never read the Castaneda books.

My mother said little during the meeting.  She was hoping that
the rabbi would build for my brother and me a framework through
which we could view our mystical quest.  When the meeting was over,
I went home and stared at the underexposed Transcendental photo
of Chinmoy.

The next day I tried to meditate, but my mind dwelt on familiar thoughts:
"As soon as I graduate, I'm going to leave my tired, depressed father.
I'm going to leave my manipulative, demanding mother.  I'm going
to follow a path with heart, and things are going to get better."

Meanwhile, my mother had asked if she could attend one of the meetings
with the Guru.

"Sure," I replied.  I felt I had nothing to hide, and I secretly
hoped that she would wish me well on my journey.

Dressed in Western clothes, she went to St. Paul's Chapel that
Wednesday night and sat near the front.  She felt uncomfortable
being surrounded by a sea of whites and saris.  She saw disciples
praying to a short, Indian man dressed in robes.  Her stomach became
tense when the man placed his hand on the forehead of her youngest son.

I stood in front of the chapel, before Chinmoy, squinting.  In the
flickering of the Guru's eyes, I was initiated.  I bowed and turned,
and in the audience I saw my mother.  I quickly looked away.
I saw myself less as the son of caring, creative, and slightly
mixed-up New York Jews, and more a disciple of the man Atmananda said
was perfect.

After initiation, I began to spend less time at home, where I often
heard things like:  "Artie, you talk to your son about what he
is getting involved in."

"Leave me alone!" my father replied, irritably.

"It's a *rotten* family!" my mother declared.

I happily spent time instead with my brother, Atmananda, and the
other Stony Brook Chinmoy disciples.

One time, while camping with my brother in a marsh near Stony Brook,
my calves began to itch.  I tried not to scratch what seemed to be
poison ivy, but must have done so in my sleep because by morning,
the rash had spread.

When I went home, my mother applied lotion to my skin.  The next day,
she asked if I was better.

"Yup," I said and left for school.  Confident that my skin would
heal on its own, I did not want to make a fuss over the red bumps
which now covered most of my body.  Yet later that day in writing
class I had to sto...p reading a poem becau...se I could no...t get
the words out, and my mother arrived and rushed me to the hospital.
After a shot of adrenaline caused the puffy, quarter-sized blotches
to shrink, the doctor pointed out that had I not been treated in time,
I might have been suffocated by the growing bump in my throat.

"How odd to have a near-death experience so soon after my
spiritual initiation," I thought.  I asked the doctor what he
thought had nearly killed me.  "Perhaps you had an allergic reaction
to something you ate," he said.  But after various food groups were
one by one reintroduced into my diet, the cause of the hives remained hidden.

I asked Atmananda what he thought had nearly killed me.  "It is
no coincidence," he said mysteriously.  "Whenever you make genuine
spiritual progress, the Negative Forces in the universe try and hold
you back.  But don't worry.  When you are attacked by the Forces,
just think of Guru."

I did think of Guru.  I often doubted, though, that nefarious,
non-physical Entities from beyond the world of reason were getting
underneath my skin.  I recalled that Don Juan tricked Castaneda
into pursuing the path to knowledge, and wondered if Atmananda's
explanation was a ploy to maneuver me closer to Guru.  But because I
sought adventure, challenge, and entrance into the metaphysical worlds
of Don Juan, Obi-Wan-Kanobi, Chinmoy and Atmananda, I willfully
suspended my disbelief.  I also suspended my plans to hitchhike west.
After reading a speech at my high school graduation, I said
good-bye to friends and family, and bought a one-way ticket east
to Stony Brook.




4.  The Community


"Hello...Atmananda?" said my brother into the phone.  Then he
winced and hung up.

"Well?"  I asked.

"I have to call him back," he replied sheepishly.

"How come?"

"He said I didn't have the right spirit."

He dialed again.  "Halllooooooo, Atmanaaaaaaanda!" he bellowed.
This time, Atmananda gave him directions to the party.

Weeks before, Atmananda gave me permission to attend his parties--
provided that I did not "vibe" the women.

"Don't look at them as women," my brother had suggested,
quoting Chinmoy and Atmananda.  "Look at them as seekers.
When you look at them as women, it hurts their evolution."

I assured him I would try.

After I moved to Stony Brook, I started going to Atmananda's
parties regularly.  At one party my brother and I arrived at
Tom's house, left our sneakers by the door, and went inside.
Atmananda, Sal, Anne, Tom, and a few other disciples stood in the kitchen.
They looked bewildered.  The air smelled charred.  Black, gooey gobs
darkened the floor.  Atmananda was not talking.  Something was wrong.

When Anne had lit the stove moments before, an explosion singed her
hair and propelled chocolate and marshmallow covered graham crackers
across the room.  Now, as we cleaned the mess, Atmananda began to speak.

"Guru protected us from the Negative Forces," he said in a rich,
lulling voice.

I told myself that the explosion had probably more to do with the gas
being left on than it did with Guru and the Forces.

"The Negative Forces want to hurt Guru's mission,"
Atmananda continued grimly.  "But they know not to challenge
an avatar directly.  Instead, they go after his disciples--
particularly those wide open to doubt."

For months I had grappled with the concept of Negative Forces.
Perhaps they existed, I told myself, perhaps they did not.
In either case, I did not take them seriously.  Now, though, I tried
to imagine what they looked like.  I pictured massive, menacing storm
clouds in a dark, foreboding sky.  I imagined the "clouds" were
aware of my current thoughts.  Suddenly the clouds seemed real.
I felt jolted.  I looked around the room.  I sensed the disciples had
taken Atmananda's caveat seriously.  My stomach felt taut.  I thanked
Chinmoy silently.

Atmananda had meanwhile flipped to a less somber mood.  "One of
the best ways to combat the Forces," he said, "is to have fun."
So we went out to eat.

At an Italian restaurant during one party, Atmananda suddenly
slapped Sal on the back and, adopting the voice of the Godfather,
cried, "Heyyy Sal!  You plenty-fine kinda guy!"

"Sure I'm plenty-fine, but I'm also plenty-hungry!" Sal replied
with an equally zesty accent, but without slapping him back.

Atmananda then denounced Sal for rescuing a maiden who had been
held against her will in "a large vat of ravioli."

"What's wrong with that?"  I asked.

"Sal, tell the baby what'sa wrong with that."

Until now I had enjoyed their antics, but the transition from
being the editor-in-chief of my high school paper to "the baby"
felt awkward.  Yet at seventeen, I was the youngest in the group,
the average age of which was twenty-one. Atmananda was twenty-seven.
And I had learned from Chinmoy and Atmananda that humility was
the quintessential spiritual quality.  Besides, I loved the attention.

Sal replied that rescuing maidens was wrong because he should
have been at home meditating.

I looked again at Sal, a twenty-year-old with a large, creased forehead.
He had studied computer engineering first at CalTech, and now
at Stony Brook.  He also studied guitar and drama.  He cradled
the eggplant parmigiano hero lovingly in his hands and closed his
eyes before each bite, as if bracing for the next dose of ecstasy.

"Observe the maestro chow hound," Atmananda announced.

We laughed.

Sal had apparently adjusted to his role as chow hound.
He continued to eat as if nothing happened.

"If only Sal could focus on the Infinite rather than on the eggplant,"
Atmananda noted, "he would be the first among us to realize God."

It was fun eating out with Atmananda.  After dinner, we often
continued the fun and the fight against the Forces at the movies.

One time, Atmananda took us to Warlords of Atlantis.  He bought
five buckets of heavily buttered popcorn, Tabs, Cokes, diet Cokes,
boxes of licorice, Sno-caps, and Raisinetes.  Then, from the fourth row--
Atmananda claimed that four was a power number--we watched a film which,
at the time, seemed extraordinary.

Atmananda sat by the aisle of the nearly empty theatre.  He whispered
something to Sal, who told Tom, who told my brother, who told me:
"Atlantis was once a real city."

"Atlantis was a real city," I told Anne, who told Dana, who told Suzanne.
Meanwhile, juxtaposed at an intersection of transmigrating junk food,
I further divided my attention between monitoring what needed
to be passed, trying not to notice the women, and watching a man
on the screen discover a lost world of magic and conflict under the sea.

"We all had past lives in Atlantis."

"We had past lives there."  Pass the Raisinetes.  A hidden city
of magicians, seers, and warriors, where the laws of physics
do not apply.

"We were together then."

"We were together."  Pass the napkins.  Crystals have a non-physical power.

"Atlantis was destroyed by the greed of its inhabitants."

"Atlantis was destroyed by greedy people."

Afterwards, we drove back to Tom's and caught the last few minutes of The
Twilight Zone.  It was late.  I was getting sleepy.  Atmananda began
to repeat how Guru had saved us from stove-demolishing Entities.
I entered a state of mind where I heard his words, but did not
scrutinize them.  Fifteen or twenty minutes later, he suggested
that we meditate on the Transcendental which Tom placed on a table
by the television.

In the months that followed, Atmananda accepted me into his inner circle
of friends.  But not every encounter with him, I quickly learned,
was a party.

* * *

One morning Atmananda emerged from his cottage in Stony Brook carrying
a thick stack of posters.  Bluejays, doves, sparrows, and chickadees
flocked around a feeder.  Sal, Paul, my brother, and I stood nearby.
Atmananda approached, but the little birds remained.

"Ellaow," he said in a Cockney accent.

"Ellaow," we echoed.

"WHAT...is your name!" he demanded, quoting from the movie Monty
Python and the Holy Grail.

"Sir Waff-noid," offered Sal.

"WHAT...is your quest!"

"I seek the higher worlds."

"WHAT...were you thinking about last night at 11:30!"

Sal blushed.

"Alas, my lad," said Atmananda, patting him on the shoulder.
"You won't reach the higher worlds thinking about that."

Atmananda showed us a poster.  It read:  "ECSTASY AS A WAY OF LIFE."
Also printed were details about a free lecture series,
"With Atmananda-Dr. Frederick Lenz."  But before he sent us
to Manhattan, Atmananda inspired us, told us how to protect ourselves,
how to change.

"Guru's mission," he said in a pacifying voice, "is to bring peace,
light, and bliss into a world that is rapidly heading towards darkness."

I realized that it was largely through Atmananda's lectures, and through
his appearances on radio and television--including a recent appearance
on the Phil Donahue Show--that Chinmoy's mission was being spread.
I felt important that I was a part of the operation.

"Your task is to see where to place the posters so that they
will be noticed by advanced seekers.  To do this you will need
to maintain a very high state of consciousness."

We nodded solemnly.

"If you run into religious fanatics, be polite but firm.
Do not let them engage you in conversation."

We nodded again.

"By postering, you are helping Guru bring light into this world.
But Negative Forces will sense this and will try to inject you
with doubts.  If you are attacked by the Forces, cry inwardly
to Guru."

I was not too worried about non-physical creatures on the prowl.
I had a great deal of self-confidence, I assumed the Guru would
protect me, and I wasn't convinced that Atmananda's ghosts
were real.

"I see that many will be helped as a result of today's efforts--
provided that Sal can muster the willpower to work and not just eat,"
he said, smiling warmly.  "And don't forget to have a good time."

We meditated a moment.

"Guru put a special force on the posters," Atmananda said,
breaking the silence and handing the stack to my brother.
Then he strutted around us in a "silly walk" which I recognized
from a Monty Python skit.

"Cheeriao."

"Cheeriao," we echoed, waddling down the driveway, imitating his imitation.
On the way to the train station, his words reverberated in my mind:
the path, spiritual, awareness, see, sea of consciousness,
dream-time, vibrations, energy, chakra, subtle, metaphysical,
pyschic, unseen forces, traps, Entities, light, and darkness.
The language defined for me a world in which I chose at each moment
between good and evil.  Put that way, there was not much of a choice.
I believed now that ours was a pure and noble quest, and that I was
a warrior of Truth, not a casualty of rhetoric.

On the train ride into the city, I sat next to Paul, a happy-go-lucky
Swede with blond hair, a broad grin, and a magnet-like attraction
for devices that were electronic.  We both were Stony Brook freshmen
who had learned about Chinmoy through Atmananda's lectures.
We both sensed that there was something out there beyond the surface
world of reason.  We both intended to do something about it.

"What's the penguin doing on the tehlee?" he quipped, quoting from
Monty Python.  Green and grey scenes of Long Island sped by through
the train's window frame.

"The penguin on the tehlee," I squawked, "is about to blow up!"

"Tickets, tickets," announced the conductor.  "All tickets please!"

I remembered how, as a kid, I rode the trains without paying.
I had stayed ahead of the ticket collector, gotten off when I
reached the front car, and then caught the next train... But
now I no longer believed in free rides.  It did not matter
that the Ultimate Destination could not, according to Atmananda,
be described using words.  I still felt that I should pay to get there.
By postering I was not only paying for myself, but was affording
thousands the opportunity to be taken for a ride of their own.
I handed the conductor my ticket.

My brother and Sal sat across from us.  Their backs were straight,
their eyes closed.  I too tried to meditate, but could not.
Instead, I thought about my parents.  I had followed Atmananda's
suggestion and told them that I was studying spiritual mysticism.
Nonetheless, they seemed convinced that their sons were getting
sucked into a cult.  I was sensitive to their reaction to me
and intentionally saw them less as the weeks went by.

I also thought about Chinmoy.  He had instructed followers to memorize
four of his disciple-published books.  I opened one and read,
"When you choose you lose."  Chinmoy, it seemed, believed that major
decisions should be left to the Supreme, his favorite word for what
Atmananda called the Infinite, which the Rabbi had referred to as God.

"Help, Guru!"  I thought, doubting I could memorize the numerous
aphorisms without divine intervention.

"Penn Station, Penn Station," came the reply.  "Last stop!"

We left the train and were funneled onto the escalator by the crowd.
Paul and my brother headed uptown on Third Avenue, while Sal and I
worked Second Avenue.  Dodging cars, bicycles, and more crowds,
we entered a supermarket and found the manager.

"Excuse me, sir," Sal said sweetly.  "We are sponsoring a workshop
on relaxation and were wondering if we could place this in your window."

"One of the posters is already outdated," I pointed out.
"So we won't have to take up more of your window space."

The manager looked us over, glanced at the poster, and nodded.

"Thanks," we said and quickly placed two, back to back, visible to people
inside and out.  After several hours we had placed more than half the stack.

Postering with Sal boosted my confidence in asking favors
from strangers.  Soon, though, we decided to work opposite sides
of the street to increase our efficiency.  I found that by acting
polite and a bit shy, I could easily persuade store owners to say yes.
The more I spread the word of Guru's mission, to people in stores
and on the street, the more I believed in it.  And the more I believed,
the more I wanted to spread the word of Guru's mission...

When Sal and I ran out of posters, we crossed over to Third Avenue,
met Paul and my brother, and caught the subway to Penn Station.
I was tired from the postering.  I found the repetitive clatter
and vibrations of the train soothing.  I found it easy to meditate.
I could have thought about how Atmananda had been teaching me
how-to-hunt-and-how-not-to-be-hunted. I could have thought about how
those who teach how-to-hunt-and-how-not-to-be-hunted can easily prey
upon those whom they teach.  I could have thought about how, by asking
Atmananda to take me beyond the world of reason, I was hunting him.
I could have thought about how he was hunting me.  But I just sat there
and let my thoughts run free.

That year, Sal, Paul, Tom, my brother, and I placed thousands
of posters in Manhattan.  Working with Anne, Dana, and Suzanne,
we also distributed thousands of handouts on the Stony Brook campus.
Sometimes we worked in sub-freezing temperatures.  Once Atmananda had us
glue posters on buildings in Manhattan in the middle of the night.
I did not mind.  I tended to enjoy the effort, in part because I
believed we were doing some good, because we had plenty of time
to pursue other interests (in January, 1979, I began studying English
literature at Stony Brook), and because as hard as we worked,
we played.

* * *

"The Muppet Movie?"  I asked after another full day of postering.
"Starring Kermit-the-Frog?"

"Trust me," Atmananda replied.

Trust was the bridge to Atmananda's world, a peculiar, improbable place
where it snowed inside buildings in Manhattan in the spring,
where invisible beings threatened a guru's mission by blowing
up stoves, and where people were hunters or hunted or both.
It felt natural to trust a man who treated me with kindness,
who exuded an aura of competency and of vulnerability, and who seemed
wholeheartedly dedicated to the cause of self-improvement.

We met at a theatre where we ate popcorn and candy in the fourth row.
I told Atmananda that the postering had gone well.  The lights faded
and the movie began.

A Hollywood agent on a fishing trip strikes up a conversation
with Kermit-the-Frog. The agent is impressed with him and suggests
that he move west, to Hollywood.

Though seemingly content in his East Coast swamp, Kermit is taken
by the agent's prediction that, as a movie star, he could make
millions of people happy.  "Make millions of people happy,"
echoes the starry-eyed muppet.

The scene reminded me of my former plan to hitchhike west on
a mystical quest.  The plan seemed less glamorous now because I
had already found a teacher and because of Atmananda's prediction.
He often told me that had he not rescued me from that path I would
have been shot by bandits and tossed in a ditch.  Perhaps, though,
the former plan would have regained some momentum had I known about,
and had I analyzed, the problems currently fouling the air between
Chinmoy and Atmananda.

One problem was sex.  Chinmoy, who taught that higher consciousness
lay above the sweaty world of physical pleasure, often instructed
us to avoid members of the opposite sex whenever possible.

In contrast, Atmananda told me, "I once had several girlfriends
at the same time--each named Susan."

There was the problem of ego.  Chinmoy emphasized over and over
the importance of humility.

Atmananda often pointed out, to his inner circle of friends,
that in a past life he was Sir Thomas More.

There was the problem of cinema.  Guru prohibited the viewing
of sexually explicit or violent movies.

Atmananda had his own view, which was to see them.  As a result,
I got to see such films as Rocky Horror Picture Show, Dawn of the Dead,
and Apocalypse Now.

There was the problem of expression of individuality.  In an attempt
to merge with the Beyond, many disciples decorated their often
sparse homes with Guru's paintings, posters, and photographs.

In contrast, Atmananda's plushly carpeted, colorful cottage,
gave me the sense that he rearranged the space until the lines
connecting the physical and non-physical dimensions meshed nicely.
By the front door, two ferns thrived beside an electronic synthesizer.
By a stained-glass window hung a photograph of Atmananda with
a toucan on his shoulder.  "The toucan died," he once told me,
"but its soul is advanced and will soon take on a human incarnation."
Multi-colored rug segments covered the stairs to the loft, where a
larger-than-life Transcendental stared down from the slanted ceiling,
directly over his bed.

And there was the problem that Stony Brook disciples learned
the language of spirituality and of dreams less from Chinmoy than Atmananda.

Able to speak at length about anything and nothing, Atmananda often did.
For him, reality seemed to consist of an infinite number of levels
which were interconnected in obvious and in not so obvious ways.

"Words are used to describe these levels but are extremely limited,"
he explained.  Nonetheless, I often found myself tripping on his
words from the world of the bizarre to the world of the sensible,
and back again.  I became familiar with the diversity of his language
during his lectures and, perhaps more so, during his parties.

"Auuuuummmmmmmmmmmmm," he chanted after a twenty-five minute meditation
at the start of one party.  He slowly bowed and touched his forehead
to the floor which is where he sat, along with the rest of us.
Then the Stony Brook disciples stoked the fireplace, set the tablecloth
on the floor, grated cheese, and emptied bags of tortilla chips.
I watched the disciples work.  Only months had passed since
the exploding stove episode, and yet I felt close to them.
There was Atmananda.  He was orchestrating the festivities.
He had brought us all together.  There was my brother.  He looked happy.
He did not seem to mind me tagging along.  There was Sal.
His intense nature seemed balanced by a fabulous sense of humor.
There was Tom, the tall, easygoing bass guitar player.  He would
soon receive a degree in history from Stony Brook.  He seemed to be
good friends with Atmananda.  And there was Paul.  He and I were
becoming friends.

Then there were the women.  According to Guru, I was not even supposed
to look them in the eye.  I tried to protect them from my wayward
sexual thoughts but sometimes, in my imagination, I did more than
just look.  Then I felt bad.  I was told that they would now have
to meditate extra hard to cleanse themselves of such "lower energy."
I wished that we could be friends.  They seemed so nice.

Rachel, with light brown hair and perceptive eyes, was closer
in age to Atmananda than the rest of us.  She had completed
medical school in three years and become a disciple in 1978,
two months after attending Atmananda's lectures at the New School
for Social Research in Manhattan.

Dana, a one-time fashion model, had been an occupational therapy
major at Canada's McGill University.  She first met Atmananda while
interviewing him for the campus radio station.  After the interview,
which touched on Atmananda's book Lifetimes:  True Accounts
of Reincarnation, he invited her to visit him in Stony Brook.
Shortly thereafter she left her boyfriend, family, school, and country.
She moved to Stony Brook, just around the block from the charismatic
young meditation teacher and author.

Connie was a waitress with long dark braids, a Midwesterner's
friendliness, and a cheeky smile.

Suzanne had long brown hair and dreamy eyes.  She studied art
at the Parson's School of Design in Manhattan.

And Anne, with long, black hair and that playful, impish grin,
was studying to be a nurse.

I turned back to watch Atmananda.  "Don't think that spirituality is
divorced from the physical world," he was saying as he reached for a chip.
"After you meditate a few years, you begin to see that Annam Brahma--
food is God."  He then set the chips-and-cheese-laden tray in the oven.

Sal observed intently, as though witnessing a ritual