The Project Gutenberg eBook of Flower Fables
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Flower Fables

Author: Louisa May Alcott


        
Release date: September 1, 1994 [eBook #163]
                Most recently updated: August 3, 2021

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/163

Credits: John Hamm and Miriam Bobkoff. HTML version by Al Haines.


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FLOWER FABLES ***

[Illustration]




Flower Fables

by Louisa May Alcott


Contents

  FLOWER FABLES
 The Frost King: or, The Power of Love
 Eva’s Visit to Fairy-Land
 The Flower’s Lesson
 Lily-Bell and Thistledown
 Little Bud
 Clover-Blossom
 Little Annie’s Dream: or, The Fairy Flower
 Ripple, the Water-Spirit
 Fairy Song




“Pondering shadows, colors, clouds
Grass-buds, and caterpillar shrouds
Boughs on which the wild bees settle,
Tints that spot the violet’s petal.”
EMERSON’S WOOD-NOTES.




TO
ELLEN EMERSON,
FOR WHOM THEY WERE FANCIED,
THESE FLOWER FABLES
ARE INSCRIBED,
BY HER FRIEND,

THE AUTHOR.

Boston, Dec. 9, 1854.




FLOWER FABLES.


The summer moon shone brightly down upon the sleeping earth, while far
away from mortal eyes danced the Fairy folk. Fire-flies hung in bright
clusters on the dewy leaves, that waved in the cool night-wind; and the
flowers stood gazing, in very wonder, at the little Elves, who lay
among the fern-leaves, swung in the vine-boughs, sailed on the lake in
lily cups, or danced on the mossy ground, to the music of the
hare-bells, who rung out their merriest peal in honor of the night.

Under the shade of a wild rose sat the Queen and her little Maids of
Honor, beside the silvery mushroom where the feast was spread.

“Now, my friends,” said she, “to while away the time till the bright
moon goes down, let us each tell a tale, or relate what we have done or
learned this day. I will begin with you, Sunny Lock,” added she,
turning to a lovely little Elf, who lay among the fragrant leaves of a
primrose.

With a gay smile, “Sunny Lock” began her story.

“As I was painting the bright petals of a blue bell, it told me this
tale.”




THE FROST-KING:
OR,
THE POWER OF LOVE.


Three little Fairies sat in the fields eating their breakfast; each
among the leaves of her favorite flower, Daisy, Primrose, and Violet,
were happy as Elves need be.

The morning wind gently rocked them to and fro, and the sun shone
warmly down upon the dewy grass, where butterflies spread their gay
wings, and bees with their deep voices sung among the flowers; while
the little birds hopped merrily about to peep at them.

On a silvery mushroom was spread the breakfast; little cakes of
flower-dust lay on a broad green leaf, beside a crimson strawberry,
which, with sugar from the violet, and cream from the yellow milkweed,
made a fairy meal, and their drink was the dew from the flowers’ bright
leaves.

“Ah me,” sighed Primrose, throwing herself languidly back, “how warm
the sun grows! give me another piece of strawberry, and then I must
hasten away to the shadow of the ferns. But while I eat, tell me, dear
Violet, why are you all so sad? I have scarce seen a happy face since
my return from Rose Land; dear friend, what means it?”

“I will tell you,” replied little Violet, the tears gathering in her
soft eyes. “Our good Queen is ever striving to keep the dear flowers
from the power of the cruel Frost-King; many ways she tried, but all
have failed. She has sent messengers to his court with costly gifts;
but all have returned sick for want of sunlight, weary and sad; we have
watched over them, heedless of sun or shower, but still his dark
spirits do their work, and we are left to weep over our blighted
blossoms. Thus have we striven, and in vain; and this night our Queen
holds council for the last time. Therefore are we sad, dear Primrose,
for she has toiled and cared for us, and we can do nothing to help or
advise her now.”

“It is indeed a cruel thing,” replied her friend; “but as we cannot
help it, we must suffer patiently, and not let the sorrows of others
disturb our happiness. But, dear sisters, see you not how high the sun
is getting? I have my locks to curl, and my robe to prepare for the
evening; therefore I must be gone, or I shall be brown as a withered
leaf in this warm light.” So, gathering a tiny mushroom for a parasol,
she flew away; Daisy soon followed, and Violet was left alone.

Then she spread the table afresh, and to it came fearlessly the busy
ant and bee, gay butterfly and bird; even the poor blind mole and
humble worm were not forgotten; and with gentle words she gave to all,
while each learned something of their kind little teacher; and the love
that made her own heart bright shone alike on all.

The ant and bee learned generosity, the butterfly and bird contentment,
the mole and worm confidence in the love of others; and each went to
their home better for the little time they had been with Violet.

Evening came, and with it troops of Elves to counsel their good Queen,
who, seated on her mossy throne, looked anxiously upon the throng
below, whose glittering wings and rustling robes gleamed like
many-colored flowers.

At length she rose, and amid the deep silence spoke thus:—

“Dear children, let us not tire of a good work, hard though it be and
wearisome; think of the many little hearts that in their sorrow look to
us for help. What would the green earth be without its lovely flowers,
and what a lonely home for us! Their beauty fills our hearts with
brightness, and their love with tender thoughts. Ought we then to leave
them to die uncared for and alone? They give to us their all; ought we
not to toil unceasingly, that they may bloom in peace within their
quiet homes? We have tried to gain the love of the stern Frost-King,
but in vain; his heart is hard as his own icy land; no love can melt,
no kindness bring it back to sunlight and to joy. How then may we keep
our frail blossoms from his cruel spirits? Who will give us counsel?
Who will be our messenger for the last time? Speak, my subjects.”

Then a great murmuring arose, and many spoke, some for costlier gifts,
some for war; and the fearful counselled patience and submission.

Long and eagerly they spoke, and their soft voices rose high.

Then sweet music sounded on the air, and the loud tones were hushed, as
in wondering silence the Fairies waited what should come.

Through the crowd there came a little form, a wreath of pure white
violets lay among the bright locks that fell so softly round the gentle
face, where a deep blush glowed, as, kneeling at the throne, little
Violet said:—

“Dear Queen, we have bent to the Frost-King’s power, we have borne
gifts unto his pride, but have we gone trustingly to him and spoken
fearlessly of his evil deeds? Have we shed the soft light of unwearied
love around his cold heart, and with patient tenderness shown him how
bright and beautiful love can make even the darkest lot?

“Our messengers have gone fearfully, and with cold looks and courtly
words offered him rich gifts, things he cared not for, and with equal
pride has he sent them back.

“Then let me, the weakest of your band, go to him, trusting in the love
I know lies hidden in the coldest heart.

“I will bear only a garland of our fairest flowers; these will I wind
about him, and their bright faces, looking lovingly in his, will bring
sweet thoughts to his dark mind, and their soft breath steal in like
gentle words. Then, when he sees them fading on his breast, will he not
sigh that there is no warmth there to keep them fresh and lovely? This
will I do, dear Queen, and never leave his dreary home, till the
sunlight falls on flowers fair as those that bloom in our own dear
land.”

Silently the Queen had listened, but now, rising and placing her hand
on little Violet’s head, she said, turning to the throng below:— “We in
our pride and power have erred, while this, the weakest and lowliest of
our subjects, has from the innocence of her own pure heart counselled
us more wisely than the noblest of our train. All who will aid our
brave little messenger, lift your wands, that we may know who will
place their trust in the Power of Love.”

Every fairy wand glistened in the air, as with silvery voices they
cried, “Love and little Violet.”

Then down from the throne, hand in hand, came the Queen and Violet, and
till the moon sank did the Fairies toil, to weave a wreath of the
fairest flowers. Tenderly they gathered them, with the night-dew fresh
upon their leaves, and as they wove chanted sweet spells, and whispered
fairy blessings on the bright messengers whom they sent forth to die in
a dreary land, that their gentle kindred might bloom unharmed.

At length it was done; and the fair flowers lay glowing in the soft
starlight, while beside them stood the Fairies, singing to the music of
the wind-harps:—


We are sending you, dear flowers,
Forth alone to die,
Where your gentle sisters may not weep
O’er the cold graves where you lie;
But you go to bring them fadeless life
In the bright homes where they dwell,
And you softly smile that ’t is so,
As we sadly sing farewell.


O plead with gentle words for us,
And whisper tenderly
Of generous love to that cold heart,
And it will answer ye;
And though you fade in a dreary home,
Yet loving hearts will tell
Of the joy and peace that you have given:
Flowers, dear flowers, farewell!”


The morning sun looked softly down upon the broad green earth, which
like a mighty altar was sending up clouds of perfume from its breast,
while flowers danced gayly in the summer wind, and birds sang their
morning hymn among the cool green leaves. Then high above, on shining
wings, soared a little form. The sunlight rested softly on the silken
hair, and the winds fanned lovingly the bright face, and brought the
sweetest odors to cheer her on.

Thus went Violet through the clear air, and the earth looked smiling up
to her, as, with the bright wreath folded in her arms, she flew among
the soft, white clouds.

On and on she went, over hill and valley, broad rivers and rustling
woods, till the warm sunlight passed away, the winds grew cold, and the
air thick with falling snow. Then far below she saw the Frost-King’s
home. Pillars of hard, gray ice supported the high, arched roof, hung
with crystal icicles. Dreary gardens lay around, filled with withered
flowers and bare, drooping trees; while heavy clouds hung low in the
dark sky, and a cold wind murmured sadly through the wintry air.

With a beating heart Violet folded her fading wreath more closely to
her breast, and with weary wings flew onward to the dreary palace.

Here, before the closed doors, stood many forms with dark faces and
harsh, discordant voices, who sternly asked the shivering little Fairy
why she came to them.

Gently she answered, telling them her errand, beseeching them to let
her pass ere the cold wind blighted her frail blossoms. Then they flung
wide the doors, and she passed in.

Walls of ice, carved with strange figures, were around her; glittering
icicles hung from the high roof, and soft, white snow covered the hard
floors. On a throne hung with clouds sat the Frost-King; a crown of
crystals bound his white locks, and a dark mantle wrought with delicate
frost-work was folded over his cold breast.

His stern face could not stay little Violet, and on through the long
hall she went, heedless of the snow that gathered on her feet, and the
bleak wind that blew around her; while the King with wondering eyes
looked on the golden light that played upon the dark walls as she
passed.

The flowers, as if they knew their part, unfolded their bright leaves,
and poured forth their sweetest perfume, as, kneeling at the throne,
the brave little Fairy said,—

“O King of blight and sorrow, send me not away till I have brought back
the light and joy that will make your dark home bright and beautiful
again. Let me call back to the desolate gardens the fair forms that are
gone, and their soft voices blessing you will bring to your breast a
never failing joy. Cast by your icy crown and sceptre, and let the
sunlight of love fall softly on your heart.

“Then will the earth bloom again in all its beauty, and your dim eyes
will rest only on fair forms, while music shall sound through these
dreary halls, and the love of grateful hearts be yours. Have pity on
the gentle flower-spirits, and do not doom them to an early death, when
they might bloom in fadeless beauty, making us wiser by their gentle
teachings, and the earth brighter by their lovely forms. These fair
flowers, with the prayers of all Fairy Land, I lay before you; O send
me not away till they are answered.”

And with tears falling thick and fast upon their tender leaves, Violet
laid the wreath at his feet, while the golden light grew ever brighter
as it fell upon the little form so humbly kneeling there.

The King’s stern face grew milder as he gazed on the gentle Fairy, and
the flowers seemed to look beseechingly upon him; while their fragrant
voices sounded softly in his ear, telling of their dying sisters, and
of the joy it gives to bring happiness to the weak and sorrowing. But
he drew the dark mantle closer over his breast and answered coldly,—

“I cannot grant your prayer, little Fairy; it is my will the flowers
should die. Go back to your Queen, and tell her that I cannot yield my
power to please these foolish flowers.”

Then Violet hung the wreath above the throne, and with weary foot went
forth again, out into the cold, dark gardens, and still the golden
shadows followed her, and wherever they fell, flowers bloomed and green
leaves rustled.

Then came the Frost-Spirits, and beneath their cold wings the flowers
died, while the Spirits bore Violet to a low, dark cell, saying as they
left her, that their King was angry that she had dared to stay when he
had bid her go.

So all alone she sat, and sad thoughts of her happy home came back to
her, and she wept bitterly. But soon came visions of the gentle flowers
dying in their forest homes, and their voices ringing in her ear,
imploring her to save them. Then she wept no longer, but patiently
awaited what might come.

Soon the golden light gleamed faintly through the cell, and she heard
little voices calling for help, and high up among the heavy cobwebs
hung poor little flies struggling to free themselves, while their cruel
enemies sat in their nets, watching their pain.

With her wand the Fairy broke the bands that held them, tenderly bound
up their broken wings, and healed their wounds; while they lay in the
warm light, and feebly hummed their thanks to their kind deliverer.

Then she went to the ugly brown spiders, and in gentle words told them,
how in Fairy Land their kindred spun all the elfin cloth, and in return
the Fairies gave them food, and then how happily they lived among the
green leaves, spinning garments for their neighbors. “And you too,”
said she, “shall spin for me, and I will give you better food than
helpless insects. You shall live in peace, and spin your delicate
threads into a mantle for the stern King; and I will weave golden
threads amid the gray, that when folded over his cold heart gentle
thoughts may enter in and make it their home.”

And while she gayly sung, the little weavers spun their silken threads,
the flies on glittering wings flew lovingly above her head, and over
all the golden light shone softly down.

When the Frost-Spirits told their King, he greatly wondered and often
stole to look at the sunny little room where friends and enemies worked
peacefully together. Still the light grew brighter, and floated out
into the cold air, where it hung like bright clouds above the dreary
gardens, whence all the Spirits’ power could not drive it; and green
leaves budded on the naked trees, and flowers bloomed; but the Spirits
heaped snow upon them, and they bowed their heads and died.

At length the mantle was finished, and amid the gray threads shone
golden ones, making it bright; and she sent it to the King, entreating
him to wear it, for it would bring peace and love to dwell within his
breast.

But he scornfully threw it aside, and bade his Spirits take her to a
colder cell, deep in the earth; and there with harsh words they left
her.

Still she sang gayly on, and the falling drops kept time so musically,
that the King in his cold ice-halls wondered at the low, sweet sounds
that came stealing up to him.

Thus Violet dwelt, and each day the golden light grew stronger; and
from among the crevices of the rocky walls came troops of little
velvet-coated moles, praying that they might listen to the sweet music,
and lie in the warm light.

“We lead,” said they, “a dreary life in the cold earth; the
flower-roots are dead, and no soft dews descend for us to drink, no
little seed or leaf can we find. Ah, good Fairy, let us be your
servants: give us but a few crumbs of your daily bread, and we will do
all in our power to serve you.”

And Violet said, Yes; so day after day they labored to make a pathway
through the frozen earth, that she might reach the roots of the
withered flowers; and soon, wherever through the dark galleries she
went, the soft light fell upon the roots of flowers, and they with new
life spread forth in the warm ground, and forced fresh sap to the
blossoms above. Brightly they bloomed and danced in the soft light, and
the Frost-Spirits tried in vain to harm them, for when they came
beneath the bright clouds their power to do evil left them.

From his dark castle the King looked out on the happy flowers, who
nodded gayly to him, and in sweet colors strove to tell him of the good
little Spirit, who toiled so faithfully below, that they might live.
And when he turned from the brightness without, to his stately palace,
it seemed so cold and dreary, that he folded Violet’s mantle round him,
and sat beneath the faded wreath upon his ice-carved throne, wondering
at the strange warmth that came from it; till at length he bade his
Spirits bring the little Fairy from her dismal prison.

Soon they came hastening back, and prayed him to come and see how
lovely the dark cell had grown. The rough floor was spread with deep
green moss, and over wall and roof grew flowery vines, filling the air
with their sweet breath; while above played the clear, soft light,
casting rosy shadows on the glittering drops that lay among the
fragrant leaves; and beneath the vines stood Violet, casting crumbs to
the downy little moles who ran fearlessly about and listened as she
sang to them.

When the old King saw how much fairer she had made the dreary cell than
his palace rooms, gentle thoughts within whispered him to grant her
prayer, and let the little Fairy go back to her friends and home; but
the Frost-Spirits breathed upon the flowers and bid him see how frail
they were, and useless to a King. Then the stern, cold thoughts came
back again, and he harshly bid her follow him.

With a sad farewell to her little friends she followed him, and before
the throne awaited his command. When the King saw how pale and sad the
gentle face had grown, how thin her robe, and weak her wings, and yet
how lovingly the golden shadows fell around her and brightened as they
lay upon the wand, which, guided by patient love, had made his once
desolate home so bright, he could not be cruel to the one who had done
so much for him, and in kindly tone he said,—

“Little Fairy, I offer you two things, and you may choose between them.
If I will vow never more to harm the flowers you may love, will you go
back to your own people and leave me and my Spirits to work our will on
all the other flowers that bloom? The earth is broad, and we can find
them in any land, then why should you care what happens to their
kindred if your own are safe? Will you do this?”

“Ah!” answered Violet sadly, “do you not know that beneath the flowers’
bright leaves there beats a little heart that loves and sorrows like
our own? And can I, heedless of their beauty, doom them to pain and
grief, that I might save my own dear blossoms from the cruel foes to
which I leave them? Ah no! sooner would I dwell for ever in your
darkest cell, than lose the love of those warm, trusting hearts.”

“Then listen,” said the King, “to the task I give you. You shall raise
up for me a palace fairer than this, and if you can work that miracle I
will grant your prayer or lose my kingly crown. And now go forth, and
begin your task; my Spirits shall not harm you, and I will wait till it
is done before I blight another flower.”

Then out into the gardens went Violet with a heavy heart; for she had
toiled so long, her strength was nearly gone. But the flowers whispered
their gratitude, and folded their leaves as if they blessed her; and
when she saw the garden filled with loving friends, who strove to cheer
and thank her for her care, courage and strength returned; and raising
up thick clouds of mist, that hid her from the wondering flowers, alone
and trustingly she began her work.

As time went by, the Frost-King feared the task had been too hard for
the Fairy; sounds were heard behind the walls of mist, bright shadows
seen to pass within, but the little voice was never heard. Meanwhile
the golden light had faded from the garden, the flowers bowed their
heads, and all was dark and cold as when the gentle Fairy came.

And to the stern King his home seemed more desolate and sad; for he
missed the warm light, the happy flowers, and, more than all, the gay
voice and bright face of little Violet. So he wandered through his
dreary palace, wondering how he had been content to live before without
sunlight and love.

And little Violet was mourned as dead in Fairy-Land, and many tears
were shed, for the gentle Fairy was beloved by all, from the Queen down
to the humblest flower. Sadly they watched over every bird and blossom
which she had loved, and strove to be like her in kindly words and
deeds. They wore cypress wreaths, and spoke of her as one whom they
should never see again.

Thus they dwelt in deepest sorrow, till one day there came to them an
unknown messenger, wrapped in a dark mantle, who looked with wondering
eyes on the bright palace, and flower-crowned elves, who kindly
welcomed him, and brought fresh dew and rosy fruit to refresh the weary
stranger. Then he told them that he came from the Frost-King, who
begged the Queen and all her subjects to come and see the palace little
Violet had built; for the veil of mist would soon be withdrawn, and as
she could not make a fairer home than the ice-castle, the King wished
her kindred near to comfort and to bear her home. And while the Elves
wept, he told them how patiently she had toiled, how her fadeless love
had made the dark cell bright and beautiful.

These and many other things he told them; for little Violet had won the
love of many of the Frost-Spirits, and even when they killed the
flowers she had toiled so hard to bring to life and beauty, she spoke
gentle words to them, and sought to teach them how beautiful is love.
Long stayed the messenger, and deeper grew his wonder that the Fairy
could have left so fair a home, to toil in the dreary palace of his
cruel master, and suffer cold and weariness, to give life and joy to
the weak and sorrowing. When the Elves had promised they would come, he
bade farewell to happy Fairy-Land, and flew sadly home.

At last the time arrived, and out in his barren garden, under a canopy
of dark clouds, sat the Frost-King before the misty wall, behind which
were heard low, sweet sounds, as of rustling trees and warbling birds.

Soon through the air came many-colored troops of Elves. First the
Queen, known by the silver lilies on her snowy robe and the bright
crown in her hair, beside whom flew a band of Elves in crimson and
gold, making sweet music on their flower-trumpets, while all around,
with smiling faces and bright eyes, fluttered her loving subjects.

On they came, like a flock of brilliant butterflies, their shining
wings and many-colored garments sparkling in the dim air; and soon the
leafless trees were gay with living flowers, and their sweet voices
filled the gardens with music. Like his subjects, the King looked on
the lovely Elves, and no longer wondered that little Violet wept and
longed for her home. Darker and more desolate seemed his stately home,
and when the Fairies asked for flowers, he felt ashamed that he had
none to give them.

At length a warm wind swept through the gardens, and the mist-clouds
passed away, while in silent wonder looked the Frost-King and the Elves
upon the scene before them.

Far as eye could reach were tall green trees whose drooping boughs made
graceful arches, through which the golden light shone softly, making
bright shadows on the deep green moss below, where the fairest flowers
waved in the cool wind, and sang, in their low, sweet voices, how
beautiful is Love.

Flowering vines folded their soft leaves around the trees, making green
pillars of their rough trunks. Fountains threw their bright waters to
the roof, and flocks of silver-winged birds flew singing among the
flowers, or brooded lovingly above their nests. Doves with gentle eyes
cooed among the green leaves, snow-white clouds floated in the sunny
sky, and the golden light, brighter than before, shone softly down.

Soon through the long aisles came Violet, flowers and green leaves
rustling as she passed. On she went to the Frost-King’s throne, bearing
two crowns, one of sparkling icicles, the other of pure white lilies,
and kneeling before him, said,—

“My task is done, and, thanks to the Spirits of earth and air, I have
made as fair a home as Elfin hands can form. You must now decide. Will
you be King of Flower-Land, and own my gentle kindred for your loving
friends? Will you possess unfading peace and joy, and the grateful love
of all the green earth’s fragrant children? Then take this crown of
flowers. But if you can find no pleasure here, go back to your own cold
home, and dwell in solitude and darkness, where no ray of sunlight or
of joy can enter.

“Send forth your Spirits to carry sorrow and desolation over the happy
earth, and win for yourself the fear and hatred of those who would so
gladly love and reverence you. Then take this glittering crown, hard
and cold as your own heart will be, if you will shut out all that is
bright and beautiful. Both are before you. Choose.”

The old King looked at the little Fairy, and saw how lovingly the
bright shadows gathered round her, as if to shield her from every harm;
the timid birds nestled in her bosom, and the flowers grew fairer as
she looked upon them; while her gentle friends, with tears in their
bright eyes, folded their hands beseechingly, and smiled on her.

Kind thought came thronging to his mind, and he turned to look at the
two palaces. Violet’s, so fair and beautiful, with its rustling trees,
calm, sunny skies, and happy birds and flowers, all created by her
patient love and care. His own, so cold and dark and dreary, his empty
gardens where no flowers could bloom, no green trees dwell, or gay
birds sing, all desolate and dim;—and while he gazed, his own Spirits,
casting off their dark mantles, knelt before him and besought him not
to send them forth to blight the things the gentle Fairies loved so
much. “We have served you long and faithfully,” said they, “give us now
our freedom, that we may learn to be beloved by the sweet flowers we
have harmed so long. Grant the little Fairy’s prayer; and let her go
back to her own dear home. She has taught us that Love is mightier than
Fear. Choose the Flower crown, and we will be the truest subjects you
have ever had.”

Then, amid a burst of wild, sweet music, the Frost-King placed the
Flower crown on his head, and knelt to little Violet; while far and
near, over the broad green earth, sounded the voices of flowers,
singing their thanks to the gentle Fairy, and the summer wind was laden
with perfumes, which they sent as tokens of their gratitude; and
wherever she went, old trees bent down to fold their slender branches
round her, flowers laid their soft faces against her own, and whispered
blessings; even the humble moss bent over the little feet, and kissed
them as they passed.

The old King, surrounded by the happy Fairies, sat in Violet’s lovely
home, and watched his icy castle melt away beneath the bright sunlight;
while his Spirits, cold and gloomy no longer, danced with the Elves,
and waited on their King with loving eagerness. Brighter grew the
golden light, gayer sang the birds, and the harmonious voices of
grateful flowers, sounding over the earth, carried new joy to all their
gentle kindred.


Brighter shone the golden shadows;
On the cool wind softly came
The low, sweet tones of happy flowers,
Singing little Violet’s name.
’Mong the green trees was it whispered,
And the bright waves bore it on
To the lonely forest flowers,
Where the glad news had not gone.


Thus the Frost-King lost his kingdom,
And his power to harm and blight.
Violet conquered, and his cold heart
Warmed with music, love, and light;
And his fair home, once so dreary,
Gay with lovely Elves and flowers,
Brought a joy that never faded
Through the long bright summer hours.


Thus, by Violet’s magic power,
All dark shadows passed away,
And o’er the home of happy flowers
The golden light for ever lay.
Thus the Fairy mission ended,
And all Flower-Land was taught
The “Power of Love,” by gentle deeds
That little Violet wrought.


As Sunny Lock ceased, another little Elf came forward; and this was the
tale “Silver Wing” told.




EVA’S VISIT TO FAIRY-LAND.


Down among the grass and fragrant clover lay little Eva by the
brook-side, watching the bright waves, as they went singing by under
the drooping flowers that grew on its banks. As she was wondering where
the waters went, she heard a faint, low sound, as of far-off music. She
thought it was the wind, but not a leaf was stirring, and soon through
the rippling water came a strange little boat.

It was a lily of the valley, whose tall stem formed the mast, while the
broad leaves that rose from the roots, and drooped again till they
reached the water, were filled with gay little Elves, who danced to the
music of the silver lily-bells above, that rang a merry peal, and
filled the air with their fragrant breath.

On came the fairy boat, till it reached a moss-grown rock; and here it
stopped, while the Fairies rested beneath the violet-leaves, and sang
with the dancing waves.

Eva looked with wonder on their gay faces and bright garments, and in
the joy of her heart sang too, and threw crimson fruit for the little
folks to feast upon.

They looked kindly on the child, and, after whispering long among
themselves, two little bright-eyed Elves flew over the shining water,
and, lighting on the clover-blossoms, said gently, “Little maiden, many
thanks for your kindness; and our Queen bids us ask if you will go with
us to Fairy-Land, and learn what we can teach you.”

“Gladly would I go with you, dear Fairies,” said Eva, “but I cannot
sail in your little boat. See! I can hold you in my hand, and could not
live among you without harming your tiny kingdom, I am so large.”

Then the Elves laughed gayly, as they folded their arms about her,
saying, “You are a good child, dear Eva, to fear doing harm to those
weaker than yourself. You cannot hurt us now. Look in the water and see
what we have done.”

Eva looked into the brook, and saw a tiny child standing between the
Elves. “Now I can go with you,” said she, “but see, I can no longer
step from the bank to yonder stone, for the brook seems now like a
great river, and you have not given me wings like yours.”

But the Fairies took each a hand, and flew lightly over the stream. The
Queen and her subjects came to meet her, and all seemed glad to say
some kindly word of welcome to the little stranger. They placed a
flower-crown upon her head, laid their soft faces against her own, and
soon it seemed as if the gentle Elves had always been her friends.

“Now must we go home,” said the Queen, “and you shall go with us,
little one.”

Then there was a great bustle, as they flew about on shining wings,
some laying cushions of violet leaves in the boat, others folding the
Queen’s veil and mantle more closely round her, lest the falling dews
should chill her.

The cool waves’ gentle plashing against the boat, and the sweet chime
of the lily-bells, lulled little Eva to sleep, and when she woke it was
in Fairy-Land. A faint, rosy light, as of the setting sun, shone on the
white pillars of the Queen’s palace as they passed in, and the sleeping
flowers leaned gracefully on their stems, dreaming beneath their soft
green curtains. All was cool and still, and the Elves glided silently
about, lest they should break their slumbers. They led Eva to a bed of
pure white leaves, above which drooped the fragrant petals of a crimson
rose.

“You can look at the bright colors till the light fades, and then the
rose will sing you to sleep,” said the Elves, as they folded the soft
leaves about her, gently kissed her, and stole away.

Long she lay watching the bright shadows, and listening to the song of
the rose, while through the long night dreams of lovely things floated
like bright clouds through her mind; while the rose bent lovingly above
her, and sang in the clear moonlight.

With the sun rose the Fairies, and, with Eva, hastened away to the
fountain, whose cool waters were soon filled with little forms, and the
air ringing with happy voices, as the Elves floated in the blue waves
among the fair white lilies, or sat on the green moss, smoothing their
bright locks, and wearing fresh garlands of dewy flowers. At length the
Queen came forth, and her subjects gathered round her, and while the
flowers bowed their heads, and the trees hushed their rustling, the
Fairies sang their morning hymn to the Father of birds and blossoms,
who had made the earth so fair a home for them.

Then they flew away to the gardens, and soon, high up among the
tree-tops, or under the broad leaves, sat the Elves in little groups,
taking their breakfast of fruit and pure fresh dew; while the
bright-winged birds came fearlessly among them, pecking the same ripe
berries, and dipping their little beaks in the same flower-cups, and
the Fairies folded their arms lovingly about them, smoothed their soft
bosoms, and gayly sang to them.

“Now, little Eva,” said they, “you will see that Fairies are not idle,
wilful Spirits, as mortals believe. Come, we will show you what we do.”

They led her to a lovely room, through whose walls of deep green leaves
the light stole softly in. Here lay many wounded insects, and harmless
little creatures, whom cruel hands had hurt; and pale, drooping flowers
grew beside urns of healing herbs, from whose fresh leaves came a
faint, sweet perfume.

Eva wondered, but silently followed her guide, little Rose-Leaf, who
with tender words passed among the delicate blossoms, pouring dew on
their feeble roots, cheering them with her loving words and happy
smile.

Then she went to the insects; first to a little fly who lay in a
flower-leaf cradle.

“Do you suffer much, dear Gauzy-Wing?” asked the Fairy. “I will bind up
your poor little leg, and Zephyr shall rock you to sleep.” So she
folded the cool leaves tenderly about the poor fly, bathed his wings,
and brought him refreshing drink, while he hummed his thanks, and
forgot his pain, as Zephyr softly sung and fanned him with her waving
wings.

They passed on, and Eva saw beside each bed a Fairy, who with gentle
hands and loving words soothed the suffering insects. At length they
stopped beside a bee, who lay among sweet honeysuckle flowers, in a
cool, still place, where the summer wind blew in, and the green leaves
rustled pleasantly. Yet he seemed to find no rest, and murmured of the
pain he was doomed to bear. “Why must I lie here, while my kindred are
out in the pleasant fields, enjoying the sunlight and the fresh air,
and cruel hands have doomed me to this dark place and bitter pain when
I have done no wrong? Uncared for and forgotten, I must stay here among
these poor things who think only of themselves. Come here, Rose-Leaf,
and bind up my wounds, for I am far more useful than idle bird or fly.”

Then said the Fairy, while she bathed the broken wing,—

“Love-Blossom, you should not murmur. We may find happiness in seeking
to be patient even while we suffer. You are not forgotten or uncared
for, but others need our care more than you, and to those who take
cheerfully the pain and sorrow sent, do we most gladly give our help.
You need not be idle, even though lying here in darkness and sorrow;
you can be taking from your heart all sad and discontented feelings,
and if love and patience blossom there, you will be better for the
lonely hours spent here. Look on the bed beside you; this little dove
has suffered far greater pain than you, and all our care can never ease
it; yet through the long days he hath lain here, not an unkind word or
a repining sigh hath he uttered. Ah, Love-Blossom, the gentle bird can
teach a lesson you will be wiser and better for.”

Then a faint voice whispered, “Little Rose-Leaf, come quickly, or I
cannot thank you as I ought for all your loving care of me.”

So they passed to the bed beside the discontented bee, and here upon
the softest down lay the dove, whose gentle eyes looked gratefully upon
the Fairy, as she knelt beside the little couch, smoothed the soft
white bosom, folded her arms about it and wept sorrowing tears, while
the bird still whispered its gratitude and love.

“Dear Fairy, the fairest flowers have cheered me with their sweet
breath, fresh dew and fragrant leaves have been ever ready for me,
gentle hands to tend, kindly hearts to love; and for this I can only
thank you and say farewell.”

Then the quivering wings were still, and the patient little dove was
dead; but the bee murmured no longer, and the dew from the flowers fell
like tears around the quiet bed.

Sadly Rose-Leaf led Eva away, saying, “Lily-Bosom shall have a grave
tonight beneath our fairest blossoms, and you shall see that gentleness
and love are prized far above gold or beauty, here in Fairy-Land. Come
now to the Flower Palace, and see the Fairy Court.”

Beneath green arches, bright with birds and flowers, beside singing
waves, went Eva into a lofty hall. The roof of pure white lilies rested
on pillars of green clustering vines, while many-colored blossoms threw
their bright shadows on the walls, as they danced below in the deep
green moss, and their low, sweet voices sounded softly through the
sunlit palace, while the rustling leaves kept time.

Beside the throne stood Eva, and watched the lovely forms around her,
as they stood, each little band in its own color, with glistening
wings, and flower wands.

Suddenly the music grew louder and sweeter, and the Fairies knelt, and
bowed their heads, as on through the crowd of loving subjects came the
Queen, while the air was filled with gay voices singing to welcome her.

She placed the child beside her, saying, “Little Eva, you shall see now
how the flowers on your great earth bloom so brightly. A band of loving
little gardeners go daily forth from Fairy-Land, to tend and watch
them, that no harm may befall the gentle spirits that dwell beneath
their leaves. This is never known, for like all good it is unseen by
mortal eyes, and unto only pure hearts like yours do we make known our
secret. The humblest flower that grows is visited by our messengers,
and often blooms in fragrant beauty unknown, unloved by all save Fairy
friends, who seek to fill the spirits with all sweet and gentle
virtues, that they may not be useless on the earth; for the noblest
mortals stoop to learn of flowers. Now, Eglantine, what have you to
tell us of your rosy namesakes on the earth?”

From a group of Elves, whose rose-wreathed wands showed the flower they
loved, came one bearing a tiny urn, and, answering the Queen, she
said,—

“Over hill and valley they are blooming fresh and fair as summer sun
and dew can make them. No drooping stem or withered leaf tells of any
evil thought within their fragrant bosoms, and thus from the fairest of
their race have they gathered this sweet dew, as a token of their
gratitude to one whose tenderness and care have kept them pure and
happy; and this, the loveliest of their sisters, have I brought to
place among the Fairy flowers that never pass away.”

Eglantine laid the urn before the Queen, and placed the fragrant rose
on the dewy moss beside the throne, while a murmur of approval went
through the hall, as each elfin wand waved to the little Fairy who had
toiled so well and faithfully, and could bring so fair a gift to their
good Queen.

Then came forth an Elf bearing a withered leaf, while her many-colored
robe and the purple tulips in her hair told her name and charge.

“Dear Queen,” she sadly said, “I would gladly bring as pleasant tidings
as my sister, but, alas! my flowers are proud and wilful, and when I
went to gather my little gift of colored leaves for royal garments,
they bade me bring this withered blossom, and tell you they would serve
no longer one who will not make them Queen over all the other flowers.
They would yield neither dew nor honey, but proudly closed their leaves
and bid me go.”

“Your task has been too hard for you,” said the Queen kindly, as she
placed the drooping flower in the urn Eglantine had given, “you will
see how this dew from a sweet, pure heart will give new life and
loveliness even to this poor faded one. So can you, dear Rainbow, by
loving words and gentle teachings, bring back lost purity and peace to
those whom pride and selfishness have blighted. Go once again to the
proud flowers, and tell them when they are queen of their own hearts
they will ask no fairer kingdom. Watch more tenderly than ever over
them, see that they lack neither dew nor air, speak lovingly to them,
and let no unkind word or deed of theirs anger you. Let them see by
your patient love and care how much fairer they might be, and when next
you come, you will be laden with gifts from humble, loving flowers.”

Thus they told what they had done, and received from their Queen some
gentle chiding or loving word of praise.

“You will be weary of this,” said little Rose-Leaf to Eva; “come now
and see where we are taught to read the tales written on flower-leaves,
and the sweet language of the birds, and all that can make a Fairy
heart wiser and better.”

Then into a cheerful place they went, where were many groups of
flowers, among whose leaves sat the child Elves, and learned from their
flower-books all that Fairy hands had written there. Some studied how
to watch the tender buds, when to spread them to the sunlight, and when
to shelter them from rain; how to guard the ripening seeds, and when to
lay them in the warm earth or send them on the summer wind to far off
hills and valleys, where other Fairy hands would tend and cherish them,
till a sisterhood of happy flowers sprang up to beautify and gladden
the lonely spot where they had fallen. Others learned to heal the
wounded insects, whose frail limbs a breeze could shatter, and who,
were it not for Fairy hands, would die ere half their happy summer life
had gone. Some learned how by pleasant dreams to cheer and comfort
mortal hearts, by whispered words of love to save from evil deeds those
who had gone astray, to fill young hearts with gentle thoughts and pure
affections, that no sin might mar the beauty of the human flower; while
others, like mortal children, learned the Fairy alphabet. Thus the
Elves made loving friends by care and love, and no evil thing could
harm them, for those they helped to cherish and protect ever watched to
shield and save them.

Eva nodded to the gay little ones, as they peeped from among the leaves
at the stranger, and then she listened to the Fairy lessons. Several
tiny Elves stood on a broad leaf while the teacher sat among the petals
of a flower that bent beside them, and asked questions that none but
Fairies would care to know.

“Twinkle, if there lay nine seeds within a flower-cup and the wind bore
five away, how many would the blossom have?” “Four,” replied the little
one.

“Rosebud, if a Cowslip opens three leaves in one day and four the next,
how many rosy leaves will there be when the whole flower has bloomed?”

“Seven,” sang the gay little Elf.

“Harebell, if a silkworm spin one yard of Fairy cloth in an hour, how
many will it spin in a day?”

“Twelve,” said the Fairy child.

“Primrose, where lies Violet Island?”

“In the Lake of Ripples.”

“Lilla, you may bound Rose Land.”

“On the north by Ferndale, south by Sunny Wave River, east by the hill
of Morning Clouds, and west by the Evening Star.”

“Now, little ones,” said the teacher, “you may go to your painting,
that our visitor may see how we repair the flowers that earthly hands
have injured.”

Then Eva saw how, on large, white leaves, the Fairies learned to
imitate the lovely colors, and with tiny brushes to brighten the blush
on the anemone’s cheek, to deepen the blue of the violet’s eye, and add
new light to the golden cowslip.

“You have stayed long enough,” said the Elves at length, “we have many
things to show you. Come now and see what is our dearest work.”

So Eva said farewell to the child Elves, and hastened with little
Rose-Leaf to the gates. Here she saw many bands of Fairies, folded in
dark mantles that mortals might not know them, who, with the child
among them, flew away over hill and valley. Some went to the cottages
amid the hills, some to the sea-side to watch above the humble fisher
folks; but little Rose-Leaf and many others went into the noisy city.

Eva wondered within herself what good the tiny Elves could do in this
great place; but she soon learned, for the Fairy band went among the
poor and friendless, bringing pleasant dreams to the sick and old,
sweet, tender thoughts of love and gentleness to the young, strength to
the weak, and patient cheerfulness to the poor and lonely.

Then the child wondered no longer, but deeper grew her love for the
tender-hearted Elves, who left their own happy home to cheer and
comfort those who never knew what hands had clothed and fed them, what
hearts had given of their own joy, and brought such happiness to
theirs.

Long they stayed, and many a lesson little Eva learned: but when she
begged them to go back, they still led her on, saying, “Our work is not
yet done; shall we leave so many sad hearts when we may cheer them, so
many dark homes that we may brighten? We must stay yet longer, little
Eva, and you may learn yet more.”

Then they went into a dark and lonely room, and here they found a pale,
sad-eyed child, who wept bitter tears over a faded flower.

“Ah,” sighed the little one, “it was my only friend, and I cherished it
with all my lone heart’s love; ’t was all that made my sad life happy;
and it is gone.”

Tenderly the child fastened the drooping stem, and placed it where the
one faint ray of sunlight stole into the dreary room.

“Do you see,” said the Elves, “through this simple flower will we keep
the child pure and stainless amid the sin and sorrow around her. The
love of this shall lead her on through temptation and through grief,
and she shall be a spirit of joy and consolation to the sinful and the
sorrowing.”

And with busy love toiled the Elves amid the withered leaves, and new
strength was given to the flower; while, as day by day the friendless
child watered the growing buds, deeper grew her love for the unseen
friends who had given her one thing to cherish in her lonely home;
sweet, gentle thoughts filled her heart as she bent above it, and the
blossom’s fragrant breath was to her a whispered voice of all fair and
lovely things; and as the flower taught her, so she taught others.

The loving Elves brought her sweet dreams by night, and happy thoughts
by day, and as she grew in childlike beauty, pure and patient amid
poverty and sorrow, the sinful were rebuked, sorrowing hearts grew
light, and the weak and selfish forgot their idle fears, when they saw
her trustingly live on with none to aid or comfort her. The love she
bore the tender flower kept her own heart innocent and bright, and the
pure human flower was a lesson to those who looked upon it; and soon
the gloomy house was bright with happy hearts, that learned of the
gentle child to bear poverty and grief as she had done, to forgive
those who brought care and wrong to them, and to seek for happiness in
humble deeds of charity and love.

“Our work is done,” whispered the Elves, and with blessings on the two
fair flowers, they flew away to other homes;—to a blind old man who
dwelt alone with none to love him, till through long years of darkness
and of silent sorrow the heart within had grown dim and cold. No
sunlight could enter at the darkened eyes, and none were near to
whisper gentle words, to cheer and comfort.

Thus he dwelt forgotten and alone, seeking to give no joy to others,
possessing none himself. Life was dark and sad till the untiring Elves
came to his dreary home, bringing sunlight and love. They whispered
sweet words of comfort,—how, if the darkened eyes could find no light
without, within there might be never-failing happiness; gentle feelings
and sweet, loving thoughts could make the heart fair, if the gloomy,
selfish sorrow were but cast away, and all would be bright and
beautiful.

They brought light-hearted children, who gathered round him, making the
desolate home fair with their young faces, and his sad heart gay with
their sweet, childish voices. The love they bore he could not cast
away, sunlight stole in, the dark thoughts passed away, and the earth
was a pleasant home to him.

Thus their little hands led him back to peace and happiness, flowers
bloomed beside his door, and their fragrant breath brought happy
thoughts of pleasant valleys and green hills; birds sang to him, and
their sweet voices woke the music in his own soul, that never failed to
calm and comfort. Happy sounds were heard in his once lonely home, and
bright faces gathered round his knee, and listened tenderly while he
strove to tell them all the good that gentleness and love had done for
him.

Still the Elves watched near, and brighter grew the heart as kindly
thoughts and tender feelings entered in, and made it their home; and
when the old man fell asleep, above his grave little feet trod lightly,
and loving hands laid fragrant flowers.

Then went the Elves into the dreary prison-houses, where sad hearts
pined in lonely sorrow for the joy and freedom they had lost. To these
came the loving band with tender words, telling of the peace they yet
might win by patient striving and repentant tears, thus waking in their
bosoms all the holy feelings and sweet affections that had slept so
long.

They told pleasant tales, and sang their sweetest songs to cheer and
gladden, while the dim cells grew bright with the sunlight, and
fragrant with the flowers the loving Elves had brought, and by their
gentle teachings those sad, despairing hearts were filled with patient
hope and earnest longing to win back their lost innocence and joy.

Thus to all who needed help or comfort went the faithful Fairies; and
when at length they turned towards Fairy-Land, many were the grateful,
happy hearts they left behind.

Then through the summer sky, above the blossoming earth, they journeyed
home, happier for the joy they had given, wiser for the good they had
done.

All Fairy-Land was dressed in flowers, and the soft wind went singing
by, laden with their fragrant breath. Sweet music sounded through the
air, and troops of Elves in their gayest robes hastened to the palace
where the feast was spread.

Soon the bright hall was filled with smiling faces and fair forms, and
little Eva, as she stood beside the Queen, thought she had never seen a
sight so lovely.

The many-colored shadows of the fairest flowers played on the pure
white walls, and fountains sparkled in the sunlight, making music as
the cool waves rose and fell, while to and fro, with waving wings and
joyous voices, went the smiling Elves, bearing fruit and honey, or
fragrant garlands for each other’s hair.

Long they feasted, gayly they sang, and Eva, dancing merrily among
them, longed to be an Elf that she might dwell forever in so fair a
home.

At length the music ceased, and the Queen said, as she laid her hand on
little Eva’s shining hair:—

“Dear child, tomorrow we must bear you home, for, much as we long to
keep you, it were wrong to bring such sorrow to your loving earthly
friends; therefore we will guide you to the brook-side, and there say
farewell till you come again to visit us. Nay, do not weep, dear
Rose-Leaf; you shall watch over little Eva’s flowers, and when she
looks at them she will think of you. Come now and lead her to the Fairy
garden, and show her what we think our fairest sight. Weep no more, but
strive to make her last hours with us happy as you can.”

With gentle caresses and most tender words the loving Elves gathered
about the child, and, with Rose-Leaf by her side, they led her through
the palace, and along green, winding paths, till Eva saw what seemed a
wall of flowers rising before her, while the air was filled with the
most fragrant odors, and the low, sweet music as of singing blossoms.

“Where have you brought me, and what mean these lovely sounds?” asked
Eva.

“Look here, and you shall see,” said Rose-Leaf, as she bent aside the
vines, “but listen silently or you cannot hear.”

Then Eva, looking through the drooping vines, beheld a garden filled
with the loveliest flowers; fair as were all the blossoms she had seen
in Fairy-Land, none were so beautiful as these. The rose glowed with a
deeper crimson, the lily’s soft leaves were more purely white, the
crocus and humble cowslip shone like sunlight, and the violet was blue
as the sky that smiled above it.

“How beautiful they are,” whispered Eva, “but, dear Rose-Leaf, why do
you keep them here, and why call you this your fairest sight?”

“Look again, and I will tell you,” answered the Fairy.

Eva looked, and saw from every flower a tiny form come forth to welcome
the Elves, who all, save Rose-Leaf, had flown above the wall, and were
now scattering dew upon the flowers’ bright leaves and talking gayly
with the Spirits, who gathered around them, and seemed full of joy that
they had come. The child saw that each one wore the colors of the
flower that was its home. Delicate and graceful were the little forms,
bright the silken hair that fell about each lovely face; and Eva heard
the low, sweet murmur of their silvery voices and the rustle of their
wings. She gazed in silent wonder, forgetting she knew not who they
were, till the Fairy said,—

“These are the spirits of the flowers, and this the Fairy Home where
those whose hearts were pure and loving on the earth come to bloom in
fadeless beauty here, when their earthly life is past. The humblest
flower that blooms has a home with us, for outward beauty is a
worthless thing if all be not fair and sweet within. Do you see yonder
lovely spirit singing with my sister Moonlight? a clover blossom was
her home, and she dwelt unknown, unloved; yet patient and content,
bearing cheerfully the sorrows sent her. We watched and saw how fair
and sweet the humble flower grew, and then gladly bore her here, to
blossom with the lily and the rose. The flowers’ lives are often short,
for cruel hands destroy them; therefore is it our greatest joy to bring
them hither, where no careless foot or wintry wind can harm them, where
they bloom in quiet beauty, repaying our care by their love and
sweetest perfumes.”

“I will never break another flower,” cried Eva; “but let me go to them,
dear Fairy; I would gladly know the lovely spirits, and ask forgiveness
for the sorrow I have caused. May I not go in?”

“Nay, dear Eva, you are a mortal child, and cannot enter here; but I
will tell them of the kind little maiden who has learned to love them,
and they will remember you when you are gone. Come now, for you have
seen enough, and we must be away.”

On a rosy morning cloud, surrounded by the loving Elves, went Eva
through the sunny sky. The fresh wind bore them gently on, and soon
they stood again beside the brook, whose waves danced brightly as if to
welcome them.

“Now, ere we say farewell,” said the Queen, as they gathered nearer to
the child, “tell me, dear Eva, what among all our Fairy gifts will make
you happiest, and it shall be yours.”

“You good little Fairies,” said Eva, folding them in her arms, for she
was no longer the tiny child she had been in Fairy-Land, “you dear good
little Elves, what can I ask of you, who have done so much to make me
happy, and taught me so many good and gentle lessons, the memory of
which will never pass away? I can only ask of you the power to be as
pure and gentle as yourselves, as tender and loving to the weak and
sorrowing, as untiring in kindly deeds to all. Grant me this gift, and
you shall see that little Eva has not forgotten what you have taught
her.”

“The power shall be yours,” said the Elves, and laid their soft hands
on her head; “we will watch over you in dreams, and when you would have
tidings of us, ask the flowers in your garden, and they will tell you
all you would know. Farewell. Remember Fairy-Land and all your loving
friends.”

They clung about her tenderly, and little Rose-Leaf placed a flower
crown on her head, whispering softly, “When you would come to us again,
stand by the brook-side and wave this in the air, and we will gladly
take you to our home again. Farewell, dear Eva. Think of your little
Rose-Leaf when among the flowers.”

Long Eva watched their shining wings, and listened to the music of
their voices as they flew singing home, and when at length the last
little form had vanished among the clouds, she saw that all around her
where the Elves had been, the fairest flowers had sprung up, and the
lonely brook-side was a blooming garden.

Thus she stood among the waving blossoms, with the Fairy garland in her
hair, and happy feelings in her heart, better and wiser for her visit
to Fairy-Land.

“Now, Star-Twinkle, what have you to teach?” asked the Queen.

“Nothing but a little song I heard the hare-bells singing,” replied the
Fairy, and, taking her harp, sang, in a low, sweet voice:—




THE FLOWER’S LESSON.


There grew a fragrant rose-tree where the brook flows,
With two little tender buds, and one full rose;
When the sun went down to his bed in the west,
The little buds leaned on the rose-mother’s breast,
While the bright eyed stars their long watch kept,
And the flowers of the valley in their green cradles slept;
Then silently in odors they communed with each other,
The two little buds on the bosom of their mother.
“O sister,” said the little one, as she gazed at the sky,
“I wish that the Dew Elves, as they wander lightly by,
Would bring me a star; for they never grow dim,
And the Father does not need them to burn round him.
The shining drops of dew the Elves bring each day
And place in my bosom, so soon pass away;
But a star would glitter brightly through the long summer hours,
And I should be fairer than all my sister flowers.
That were better far than the dew-drops that fall
On the high and the low, and come alike to all.
I would be fair and stately, with a bright star to shine
And give a queenly air to this crimson robe of mine.”
And proudly she cried, “These fire-flies shall be
My jewels, since the stars can never come to me.”
Just then a tiny dew-drop that hung o’er the dell
On the breast of the bud like a soft star fell;
But impatiently she flung it away from her leaf,
And it fell on her mother like a tear of grief,
While she folded to her breast, with wilful pride,
A glittering fire-fly that hung by her side.
“Heed,” said the mother rose, “daughter mine,
Why shouldst thou seek for beauty not thine?
The Father hath made thee what thou now art;
And what he most loveth is a sweet, pure heart.
Then why dost thou take with such discontent
The loving gift which he to thee hath sent?
For the cool fresh dew will render thee far
More lovely and sweet than the brightest star;
They were made for Heaven, and can never come to shine
Like the fire-fly thou hast in that foolish breast of thine.
O my foolish little bud, do listen to thy mother;
Care only for true beauty, and seek for no other.
There will be grief and trouble in that wilful little heart;
Unfold thy leaves, my daughter, and let the fly depart.”
But the proud little bud would have her own will,
And folded the fire-fly more closely still;
Till the struggling insect tore open the vest
Of purple and green, that covered her breast.
When the sun came up, she saw with grief
The blooming of her sister bud leaf by leaf.
While she, once as fair and bright as the rest,
Hung her weary head down on her wounded breast.
Bright grew the sunshine, and the soft summer air
Was filled with the music of flowers singing there;
But faint grew the little bud with thirst and pain,
And longed for the cool dew; but now ’t was in vain.
Then bitterly she wept for her folly and pride,
As drooping she stood by her fair sister’s side.
Then the rose mother leaned the weary little head
On her bosom to rest, and tenderly she said:
“Thou hast learned, my little bud, that, whatever may betide,
Thou canst win thyself no joy by passion or by pride.
The loving Father sends the sunshine and the shower,
That thou mayst become a perfect little flower;—
The sweet dews to feed thee, the soft wind to cheer,
And the earth as a pleasant home, while thou art dwelling here.
Then shouldst thou not be grateful for all this kindly care,
And strive to keep thyself most innocent and fair?
Then seek, my little blossom, to win humility;
Be fair without, be pure within, and thou wilt happy be.
So when the quiet Autumn of thy fragrant life shall come,
Thou mayst pass away, to bloom in the Flower Spirits’ home.”
Then from the mother’s breast, where it still lay hid,
Into the fading bud the dew-drop gently slid;
Stronger grew the little form, and happy tears fell,
As the dew did its silent work, and the bud grew well,
While the gentle rose leaned, with motherly pride,
O’er the fair little ones that bloomed at her side.


Night came again, and the fire-flies flew;
But the bud let them pass, and drank of the dew;
While the soft stars shone, from the still summer heaven,
On the happy little flower that had learned the lesson given.


The music-loving Elves clapped their hands, as Star-Twinkle ceased; and
the Queen placed a flower crown, with a gentle smile, upon the Fairy’s
head, saying,—

“The little bud’s lesson shall teach us how sad a thing is pride, and
that humility alone can bring true happiness to flower and Fairy. You
shall come next, Zephyr.”

And the little Fairy, who lay rocking to and fro upon a fluttering
vine-leaf, thus began her story:—

“As I lay resting in the bosom of a cowslip that bent above the brook,
a little wind, tired of play, told me this tale of




LILY-BELL AND THISTLEDOWN.


Once upon a time, two little Fairies went out into the world, to seek
their fortune. Thistledown was as gay and gallant a little Elf as ever
spread a wing. His purple mantle, and doublet of green, were
embroidered with the brightest threads, and the plume in his cap came
always from the wing of the gayest butterfly.

But he was not loved in Fairy-Land, for, like the flower whose name and
colors he wore, though fair to look upon, many were the little thorns
of cruelty and selfishness that lay concealed by his gay mantle. Many a
gentle flower and harmless bird died by his hand, for he cared for
himself alone, and whatever gave him pleasure must be his, though happy
hearts were rendered sad, and peaceful homes destroyed.

Such was Thistledown; but far different was his little friend,
Lily-Bell. Kind, compassionate, and loving, wherever her gentle face
was seen, joy and gratitude were found; no suffering flower or insect,
that did not love and bless the kindly Fairy; and thus all Elf-Land
looked upon her as a friend.

Nor did this make her vain and heedless of others; she humbly dwelt
among them, seeking to do all the good she might; and many a houseless
bird and hungry insect that Thistledown had harmed did she feed and
shelter, and in return no evil could befall her, for so many friends
were all about her, seeking to repay her tenderness and love by their
watchful care.

She would not now have left Fairy-Land, but to help and counsel her
wild companion, Thistledown, who, discontented with his quiet home,
WOULD seek his fortune in the great world, and she feared he would
suffer from his own faults for others would not always be as gentle and
forgiving as his kindred. So the kind little Fairy left her home and
friends to go with him; and thus, side by side, they flew beneath the
bright summer sky.

On and on, over hill and valley, they went, chasing the gay
butterflies, or listening to the bees, as they flew from flower to
flower like busy little housewives, singing as they worked; till at
last they reached a pleasant garden, filled with flowers and green, old
trees.

“See,” cried Thistledown, “what a lovely home is here; let us rest
among the cool leaves, and hear the flowers sing, for I am sadly tired
and hungry.”

So into the quiet garden they went, and the winds gayly welcomed them,
while the flowers nodded on their stems, offering their bright leaves
for the Elves to rest upon, and fresh, sweet honey to refresh them.

“Now, dear Thistle, do not harm these friendly blossoms,” said
Lily-Bell; “see how kindly they spread their leaves, and offer us their
dew. It would be very wrong in you to repay their care with cruelty and
pain. You will be tender for my sake, dear Thistle.”

Then she went among the flowers, and they bent lovingly before her, and
laid their soft leaves against her little face, that she might see how
glad they were to welcome one so good and gentle, and kindly offered
their dew and honey to the weary little Fairy, who sat among their
fragrant petals and looked smilingly on the happy blossoms, who, with
their soft, low voices, sang her to sleep.

While Lily-Bell lay dreaming among the rose-leaves, Thistledown went
wandering through the garden. First he robbed the bees of their honey,
and rudely shook the little flowers, that he might get the dew they had
gathered to bathe their buds in. Then he chased the bright winged
flies, and wounded them with the sharp thorn he carried for a sword; he
broke the spider’s shining webs, lamed the birds, and soon wherever he
passed lay wounded insects and drooping flowers; while the winds
carried the tidings over the garden, and bird and blossom looked upon
him as an evil spirit, and fled away or closed their leaves, lest he
should harm them.

Thus he went, leaving sorrow and pain behind him, till he came to the
roses where Lily-Bell lay sleeping. There, weary of his cruel sport, he
stayed to rest beneath a graceful rose-tree, where grew one blooming
flower and a tiny bud.

“Why are you so slow in blooming, little one? You are too old to be
rocked in your green cradle longer, and should be out among your sister
flowers,” said Thistle, as he lay idly in the shadow of the tree.

“My little bud is not yet strong enough to venture forth,” replied the
rose, as she bent fondly over it; “the