The Project Gutenberg eBook of The History and Practice of the Art of Photography
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The History and Practice of the Art of Photography

Author: Henry Hunt Snelling


        
Release date: October 1, 1994 [eBook #168]
                Most recently updated: January 1, 2021

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/168

Credits: Produced by Gregory Walker, for the Digital Daguerreian Archive Project.


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HISTORY AND PRACTICE OF THE ART OF PHOTOGRAPHY ***




Produced by Gregory Walker, for the Digital Daguerreian Archive Project.










This etext was created by Gregory Walker, in Austin, Texas, for the
Digital Daguerreian Archive Project--electronic texts from the dawn of
photography.

Internet: gwalker@netcom.com   CompuServe: 73577,677

The location of the illustrations in the text are marked by
"[hipho_##.gif]" on a separate line.

I hope this etext inspires a wider interest in the origins of
photography and in the modern practice of the Daguerreian Art.





THE HISTORY AND PRACTICE OF THE ART OF PHOTOGRAPHY;

OR THE PRODUCTION OF PICTURES THROUGH THE AGENCY OF LIGHT.

CONTAINING ALL THE INSTRUCTIONS NECESSARY FOR THE COMPLETE PRACTICE OF
THE DAGUERREAN AND PHOTOGENIC ART, BOTH ON METALLIC PLATES AND ON PAPER.


By HENRY H. SNELLING.



ILLUSTRATED WITH WOOD CUTS.



New York:  PUBLISHED BY G. P. PUTNAM, 155 Broadway, 1849.




Entered according to act of Congress in the year 1849, by H. H.
Snelling, in the Clerk's office, of the District Court of the Southern
District of New York.


New York:  PRINTED BY BUSTEED & McCOY, 163 Fulton Street.




TO EDWARD ANTHONY, ESQ., AN ESTEEMED FRIEND.

Whose gentlemanly deportment, liberal feelings, and strict integrity
have secured him a large circle of friends, this work is Respectfully
Dedicated By the AUTHOR.




                            PREFACE.


The object of this little work is to fill a void much complained of by
Daguerreotypists--particularly young beginners.

The author has waited a long time in hopes that some more able pen
would be devoted to the subject, but the wants of the numerous, and
constantly increasing, class, just mentioned, induces him to wait no
longer.

All the English works on the subject--particularly on the practical
application, of Photogenic drawing--are deficient in many minute
details, which are essential to a complete understanding of the art.
Many of their methods of operating are entirely different from, and
much inferior to, those practised in the United States: their
apparatus, also, cannot compare with ours for completeness, utility or
simplicity.

I shall, therefore, confine myself principally--so far as Photogenic
drawing upon metalic plates is concerned--to the methods practised by
the most celebrated and experienced operators, drawing upon French and
English authority only in cases where I find it essential to the
purpose for which I design my work, namely:  furnishing a complete
system of Photography; such an one as will enable any gentleman, or
lady, who may wish to practise the art, for profit or amusement, to do
so without the trouble and expense of seeking instruction from
professors, which in many cases within my own knowledge has prevented
persons from embracing the profession.

To English authors I am principally indebted for that portion of my
work relating to Photogenic drawing on paper.  To them we owe nearly
all the most important improvements in that branch of the art.
Besides, it has been but seldom attempted in the United States, and
then without any decided success.  Of these attempts I shall speak
further in the Historical portion of this volume.

Every thing essential, therefore, to a complete knowledge of the whole
art, comprising all the most recent discoveries and improvements down
to the day of publication will be found herein laid down.




CONTENTS

      I.  A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE ART.
     II.  THE THEORY ON LIGHT.--THE PHOTOGRAPHIC PRINCIPLE
    III.  SYNOPSIS OF MR. HUNT'S TREATISE ON "THE INFLUENCE OF THE
          SOLAR RAYS ON COMPOUND BODIES, WITH ESPECIAL REFERENCE TO
          THEIR PHOTOGRAPHIC APPLICATION."
     IV.  A FEW HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS TO DAGUERREOTYPISTS.
      V.  DAGUERREOTYPE APPARATUS.
     VI.  THE DAGUERREOTYPE PROCESS.
    VII.  PAPER DAGUERREOTYPES.--ETCHING DAGUERREOTYPES.
   VIII.  PHOTOGENIC DRAWING ON PAPER.
     IX.  CALOTYPE AND CHRYSOTYPE.
      X.  CYANOTYPE--ENERGIATYPE--CHROMATYPE--ANTHOTYPE--AMPHITYPE
          AND "CRAYON DAGUERREOTYPE."
     XI.  ON THE PROBABILITY OF PRODUCING COLORED PICTURES BY THE SOLAR
          RADIATIONS--PHOTOGRAPHIC DEVIATIONS--LUNAR PICTURES--DRUMMOND
          LIGHT.
    XII.  ON COLORING DAGUERREOTYPES.
   XIII.  THE PHOTOGRAPHOMETER.
          INDEX.




INTRODUCTION


  New York, January 27, 1849.
  E. ANTHONY, ESQ.

Dear Sir,--In submitting the accompanying "History and Practice of
Photography" to your perusal, and for your approbation, I do so with
the utmost confidence in your ability as a practical man, long engaged
in the science of which it treats, as well as your knowledge of the
sciences generally; as well as your regard for candor.  To you,
therefore, I leave the decision whether or no I have accomplished my
purpose, and produced a work which may not only be of practical benefit
to the Daguerrean artist, but of general interest to the reading
public, and your decision will influence me in offering it for, or
withholding it from, publication.

If it meets your approbation, I would most respectfully ask permission
to dedicate it to you, subscribing myself,

  With esteem,
  Ever truly yours,
  HENRY H. SNELLING


  New York, February 1st, 1849.
  Mr. H. H. SNELLING.

Dear Sir--Your note of January 27th, requesting permission to dedicate
to me your "History and Practice of Photography," I esteem a high
compliment, particularly since I have read the manuscript of your work.

Such a treatise has long been needed, and the manner in which you have
handled the subject will make the book as interesting to the reading
public as it is valuable to the Daguerrean artist, or the amateur
dabbler in Photography.  I have read nearly all of the many works upon
this art that have emanated from the London and Paris presses, and I
think the reader will find in yours the pith of them all, with much
practical and useful information that I do not remember to have seen
communicated elsewhere.

There is much in it to arouse the reflective and inventive faculties of
our Daguerreotypists.  They have heretofore stumbled along with very
little knowledge of the true theory of their art, and yet the quality
of their productions is far in advance of those of the French and
English artists, most of whose establishments I have had the pleasure
of visiting I feel therefore, that when a sufficient amount of
theoretic knowledge shall have been added to this practical skill on
the part of our operators, and when they shall have been made fully
acquainted with what has been attained or attempted by others, a still
greater advance in the art will be manifested.

A GOOD Daguerreotypist is by no means a mere machine following a
certain set of fixed rules.  Success in this art requires personal
skill and artistic taste to a much greater degree than the unthinking
public generally imagine; in fact more than is imagined by nine-tenths
of the Daguerreotypists themselves.  And we see as a natural result,
that while the business numbers its thousands of votaries, but few rise
to any degree of eminence.  It is because they look upon their business
as a mere mechanical operation, and having no aim or pride beyond the
earning of their daily bread, they calculate what will be a fair per
centage on the cost of their plate, case, and chemicals, leaving MIND,
which is as much CAPITAL as anything else (where it is exercised,)
entirely out of the question.

The art of taking photographs on PAPER, of which your work treats at
considerable length, has as yet attracted but little attention in this
country, though destined, as I fully believe, to attain an importance
far superior to that to which the Daguerreotype has risen.

The American mind needs a waking up upon the subject, and I think your
book will give a powerful impulse in this direction.  In Germany a high
degree of perfection has been reached, and I hope your countrymen will
not be slow to follow.

Your interesting account of the experiments of Mr. Wattles was entirely
new to me, and is another among the many evidences that when the age is
fully ripe for any great discovery, it is rare that it does not occur
to more than a single mind.

Trusting that your work will meet with the encouragement which your
trouble in preparing it deserves, and with gratitude for the undeserved
compliment paid to me in its dedication,

  I remain, very sincerely,
  Your friend and well wisher,
  E. ANTHONY.



PHOTOGRAPHY.

CHAP. I.

A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE ART.


As in all cases of great and valuable inventions in science and art the
English lay claim to the honor of having first discovered that of
Photogenic drawing.  But we shall see in the progress of this history,
that like many other assumptions of their authors, priority in this is
no more due them, then the invention of steamboats, or the cotton gin.

This claim is founded upon the fact that in 1802 Mr. Wedgwood recorded
an experiment in the Journal of the Royal Institution of the following
nature.

"A piece of paper, or other convenient material, was placed upon a
frame and sponged over with a solution of nitrate of silver; it was
then placed behind a painting on glass and the light traversing the
painting produced a kind of copy upon the prepared paper, those parts
in which the rays were least intercepted being of the darkest hues.
Here, however, terminated the experiment; for although both Mr.
Wedgwood and Sir Humphry Davey experimented carefully, for the purpose
of endeavoring to fix the drawings thus obtained, yet the object could
not be accomplished, and the whole ended in failure."

This, by their own showing, was the earliest attempt of the English
savans.  But this much of the principle was known to the Alchemists at
an early date--although practically produced in another way--as the
following experiment, to be found in old books, amply proves.

"Dissolve chalk in aquafortis to the consistence of milk, and add to it
a strong solution of silver; keep this liquor in a glass bottle well
stopped; then cutting out from a piece of paper the letters you would
have appear, paste it on the decanter, and lay it in the sun's rays in
such a manner that the rays may pass through the spaces cut out of the
paper and fall on the surface of the liquor the part of the glass
through which the rays pass will be turned black, while that under the
paper remains white; but particular care must be observed that the
bottle be not moved during the operation."

Had not the alchemists been so intent upon the desire to discover the
far famed philosopher's stone, as to make them unmindful of the
accidental dawnings of more valuable discoveries, this little
experiment in chemistry might have induced them to prosecute a more
thorough search into the principle, and Photogenic art would not now,
as it is, be a new one.

It is even asserted that the Jugglers of India were for many ages in
possession of a secret by which they were enabled, in a brief space, to
copy the likeness of any individual by the action of light.  This fact,
if fact it be, may account for the celebrated magic mirrors said to be
possessed by these jugglers, and probable cause of their power over the
people.

However, as early as 1556 the fact was established that a combination
of chloride and silver, called, from its appearance, horn silver, was
blackened by the sun's rays; and in the latter part of the last century
Mrs. Fulhame published an experiment by which a change of color was
effected in the chloride of gold by the agency of light; and gave it as
her opinion that words might be written in this way.  These incidents
are considered as the first steps towards the discovery of the
Photogenic art.

Mr. Wedgwood's experiments can scarcely be said to be any improvement
on them since he failed to bring them to practical usefulness, and his
countrymen will have to be satisfied with awarding the honor of its
complete adaptation to practical purposes, to MM.  Niepce and Daguerre
of France, and to Professors Draper, and Morse of New-York.

These gentlemen--MM.  Niepce and Daguerre--pursued the subject
simultaneously, without either, however being aware of the experiments
of his colleague in science.  For several years, each pursued his
researches individually until chance made them acquainted, when they
entered into co-partnership, and conjointly brought the art almost to
perfection.

M. Niepce presented his first paper on the subject to the Royal Society
in 1827, naming his discovery Heliography.  What led him to the study
of the principles of the art I have no means, at present, of knowing,
but it was probably owing to the facts recorded by the Alchemists, Mrs.
Fulhame and others, already mentioned.  But M. Daguerre, who is a
celebrated dioramic painter, being desirous of employing some of the
singularly changeable salts of silver to produce a peculiar class of
effects in his paintings, was led to pursue an investigation which
resulted in the discovery of the Daguerreotype, or Photogenic drawing
on plates of copper coated with silver.

To this gentleman--to his liberality--are we Americans indebted for the
free use of his invention; and the large and increasing class of
Daguerrean artists of this country should hold him in the most profound
respect for it.  He was not willing that it should be confined to a few
individuals who might monopolise the benefits to be derived from its
practice, and shut out all chance of improvement.  Like a true, noble
hearted French gentleman he desired that his invention should spread
freely throughout the whole world.  With these views he opened
negociations with the French government which were concluded most
favorably to both the inventors, and France has the "glory of endowing
the whole world of science and art with one of the most surprising
discoveries that honor the land."

Notwithstanding this, it has been patented in England and the result is
what might have been expected:  English pictures are far below the
standard of excellence of those taken by American artists.  I have seen
some medium portraits, for which a guinea each had been paid, and taken
too, by a celebrated artist, that our poorest Daguerreotypists would be
ashamed to show to a second person, much less suffer to leave their
rooms.

CALOTYPE, the name given to one of the methods of Photogenic drawing on
paper, discovered, and perfected by Mr. Fox Talbot of England, is
precisely in the same predicament, not only in that country but in the
United States, Mr. Talbot being patentee in both.  He is a man of some
wealth, I believe, but he demands so high a price for a single right in
this country, that none can be found who have the temerity to purchase.

The execution of his pictures is also inferior to those taken by the
German artists, and I would remark en passant, that the Messrs.  Mead
exhibited at the last fair of the American Institute, (of 1848,) four
Calotypes, which one of the firm brought from Germany last Spring, that
for beauty, depth of tone and excellence of execution surpass the
finest steel engraving.

When Mr. Talbot's patent for the United States expires and our
ingenious Yankee boys have the opportunity, I have not the slightest
doubt of the Calotype, in their hands, entirely superceding the
Daguerreotype.

Let them, therefore, study the principles of the art as laid down in
this little work, experiment, practice and perfect themselves in it,
and when that time does arrive be prepared to produce that degree of
excellence in Calotype they have already obtained in Daguerreotype.

It is to Professor Samuel F. B. Morse, the distinguished inventor of
the Magnetic Telegraph, of New York, that we are indebted for the
application of Photography, to portrait taking.  He was in Paris, for
the purpose of presenting to the scientific world his Electro-Magnetic
Telegraph, at the time, (1838,) M. Daguerre announced his splendid
discovery, and its astounding results having an important bearing on
the arts of design arrested his attention.  In his letter to me on the
subject, the Professor gives the following interesting facts.

"The process was a secret, and negociations were then in progress, for
the disclosure of it to the public between the French government and
the distinguished discoverer.  M. Daguerre had shown his results to the
king, and to a few only of the distinguished savans, and by the advice
of M. Arago, had determined to wait the action of the French Chambers,
before showing them to any other persons.  I was exceedingly desirous
of seeing them, but knew not how to approach M. Daguerre who was a
stranger to me.  On mentioning my desire to Robert Walsh, Esq., our
worthy Consul, he said to me; 'state that you are an American, the
inventor of the Telegraph, request to see them, and invite him in turn
to see the Telegraph, and I know enough of the urbanity and liberal
feelings of the French, to insure you an invitation.' I was successfull
in my application, and with a young friend, since deceased, the
promising son of Edward Delevan, Esq., I passed a most delightful hour
with M. Daguerre, and his enchanting sun-pictures. My letter containing
an account of this visit, and these pictures, was the first
announcement in this country of this splendid discovery."

"I may here add the singular sequel to this visit.  On the succeeding
day M. Daguerre paid me a visit to see the Telegraph and witness its
operations.  He seemed much gratified and remained with me perhaps two
hours; two melancholy hours to him, as they afterwards proved; or while
he was with me, his buildings, including his diorama, his studio, his
laboratory, with all the beautiful pictures I had seen the day before,
were consumed by fire.  Fortunately for mankind, matter only was
consumed, the soul and mind of the genius, and the process were still
in existence."

On his return home, Professor Morse waited with impatience for the
revelation of M. Daguerre's process, and no sooner was it published
than he procured a copy of the work containing it, and at once
commenced taking Daguerreotype pictures.  At first his object was
solely to furnish his studio with studies from nature; but his
experiments led him into a belief of the practicability of procuring
portraits by the process, and he was undoubtedly the first whose
attempts were attended with success.  Thinking, at that time, that it
was necessary to place the sitters in a very strong light, they were
all taken with their eyes closed.

Others were experimenting at the same time, among them Mr. Wolcott and
Prof. Draper, and Mr. Morse, with his accustomed modesty, thinks that
it would be difficult to say to whom is due the credit of the first
Daguerreotype portrait.  At all events, so far as my knowledge serves
me, Professor Morse deserves the laurel wreath, as from him originated
the first of our inumerable class of Daguerreotypists; and many of his
pupils have carried the manipulation to very great perfection.  In
connection with this matter I will give the concluding paragraph of a
private letter from the Professor to me; He says.

"If mine were the first, other experimenters soon made better results,
and if there are any who dispute that I was first, I shall have no
argument with them; for I was not so anxious to be the first to produce
the result, as to produce it in any way.  I esteem it but the natural
carrying out of the wonderful discovery, and that the credit was after
all due to Daguerre.  I lay no claim to any improvements."

Since I commenced the compilation of this work, I have had the pleasure
of making the acquaintance of an American gentleman--James M. Wattles
Esq.--who as early as 1828--and it will be seen, by what I have already
stated, that this is about the same date of M. Niepce's discovery--had
his attention attracted to the subject of Photography, or as he termed
it "Solar picture drawing," while taking landscape views by means of
the camera-obscura.  When we reflect upon all the circumstances
connected with his experiments, the great disadvantages under which he
labored, and his extreme youthfullness, we cannot but feel a national
pride--yet wonder--that a mere yankee boy, surrounded by the deepest
forests, hundred of miles from the populous portion of our country,
without the necessary materials, or resources for procuring them,
should by the force of his natural genius make a discovery, and put it
in practical use, to accomplish which, the most learned philosophers of
Europe, with every requisite apparatus, and a profound knowledge of
chemistry--spent years of toil to accomplish.  How much more latent
talent may now be slumbering from the very same cause which kept Mr.
Wattles from publicly revealing his discoveries, viz; want of
encouragement--ridicule!

At the time when the idea of taking pictures permanently on paper by
means of the camera-obscura first occurred to him, he was but sixteen
years of age, and under the instructions of Mr. Charles Le Seuer, (a
talented artist from Paris) at the New Harmony school, Indiana.
Drawing and painting being the natural bent of his mind, he was
frequently employed by the professors to make landscape sketches in the
manner mentioned.  The beauty of the image of these landscapes produced
on the paper in the camera-obscura, caused him to pause and admire them
with all the ardor of a young artist, and wish that by some means, he
could fix them there in all their beauty.  From wishing he brought
himself to think that it was not only possible but actually capable of
accomplishment and from thinking it could, he resolved it should be
done.

He was, however, wholly ignorant of even the first principles of
chemistry, and natural philosophy, and all the knowledge he was enabled
to obtain from his teachers was of very little service to him.  To add
to this, whenever he mentioned his hopes to his parents, they laughed
at him, and bade him attend to his studies and let such moonshine
thoughts alone--still he persevered, though secretly, and he met with
the success his perseverance deserved.

For the truth of his statement, Mr. Wattles refers to some of our most
respectable citizens residing at the west, and I am in hopes that I
shall be enabled to receive in time for this publication, a
confirmation from one or more of these gentlemen.  Be that as it may, I
feel confident in the integrity of Mr. Wattles, and can give his
statement to the world without a doubt of its truth.

The following sketch of his experiments and their results will,
undoubtedly, be interesting to every American reader and although some
of the profound philosophers of Europe may smile at his method of
proceeding, it will in some measure show the innate genius of American
minds, and prove that we are not far behind our trans-atlantic brethren
in the arts and sciences.

Mr. Wattles says:  "In my first efforts to effect the desired object,
they were feeble indeed, and owing to my limited knowledge of
chemistry--wholly acquired by questioning my teachers--I met with
repeated failures but following them up with a determined spirit, I at
last produced, what I thought very fair samples--but to proceed to my
experiments."

"I first dipped a quarter sheet of thin white writing paper in a weak
solution of caustic (as I then called it) and dried it in an empty box,
to keep it in the dark; when dry, I placed it in the camera and watched
it with great patience for nearly half an hour, without producing any
visible result; evidently from the solution being to weak.  I then
soaked the same piece of paper in a solution of common potash, and then
again in caustic water a little stronger than the first, and when dry
placed it in the camera.  In about forty-five minutes I plainly
percieved the effect, in the gradual darkening of various parts of the
view, which was the old stone fort in the rear of the school garden,
with the trees, fence, &c.  I then became convinced of the
practicability of producing beautiful solar pictures in this way; but,
alas! my picture vanished and with it, all--no not all--my hopes.  With
renewed determination I began again by studying the nature of the
preparation, and came to the conclusion, that if I could destroy the
part not acted upon by the light without injuring that which was so
acted upon, I could save my pictures.  I then made a strong solution of
sal. soda I had in the house, and soaked my paper in it, and then
washed it off in hot water, which perfectly fixed the view upon the
paper.  This paper was very poor with thick spots, more absorbent than
other parts, and consequently made dark shades in the picture where
they should not have been; but it was enough to convince me that I had
succeeded, and that at some future time, when I had the means and a
more extensive knowledge of chemistry, I could apply myself to it
again.  I have done so since, at various times, with perfect success;
but in every instance laboring under adverse circumstances."

I have very recently learned, that, under the present patent laws of
the United States, every foreign patentee is required to put his
invention, or discovery, into practical use within eighteen months
after taking out his papers, or otherwise forfeit his patent.  With
regard to Mr. Talbot's Calotype patent, this time has nearly, if not
quite expired, and my countrymen are now at perfect liberty to
appropriate the art if they feel disposed.  From the statement of Mr.
Wattles, it will be perceived that this can be done without dishonor,
as in the first instance Mr. Talbot had no positive right to his patent.

Photography; or sun-painting is divided, according to the methods
adopted for producing pictures, into

  DAGUERREOTYPE, CHROMATYPE,
  CALOTYPE,      ENERGIATYPE,
  CHRYSOTYPE,    ANTHOTYPE and
  CYANOTYPE,     AMPHITYPE.



CHAP. II.

THE THEORY ON LIGHT.--THE PHOTOGRAPHIC PRINCIPLE


Some philosophers contend that to the existence of light alone we owe
the beautiful effects produced by the Photogenic art, while others give
sufficient reasons for doubting the correctness of the assumption.
That the results are effected by a principle associated with light and
not by the luminous principle itself, is the most probable conclusion.
The importance of a knowledge of this fact becomes most essential in
practice, as will presently be seen.  To this principle Mr. Hunt gives
the name of ENERGIA.

THE NATURE of Light is not wholly known, but it is generally believed
to be matter, as in its motions it obeys the laws regulating matter.
So closely is it connected with heat and electricity that there can be
little doubt of their all being but different modifications of the same
substance.  I will not, however, enter into a statement of the various
theories of Philosophers on this head, but content myself with that of
Sir Isaac Newton; who supposed rays of light to consist of minute
particles of matter, which are constantly emanating from luminous
bodies and cause vision, as odoriferous particles, proceeding from
certain bodies, cause smelling.

The effects of light upon other bodies, and how light is effected by
them, involve some of the most important principles, which if properly
understood by Daguerreotypists would enable them to improve and correct
many of the practical operations in their art.  These effects we shall
exhibit in this and the following chapters.  Before we enter on this
subject it will be necessary to become familiar with the

DEFINITIONS of some of the terms used in the science of optics.

Luminous bodies are of two kinds; those which shine by their own light,
and those which shine by reflected light.

Transparent bodies are such as permit rays of light to pass through
them.

Translucent bodies permit light to pass faintly, but without
representing the figure of objects seen through them.

Opaque bodies permit no light to pass through them, but reflect light.

A ray is a line of light.

A beam is a collection of parallel rays.

A pencil is a collection of converging, or diverging rays.

A medium is any space through which light passes.

Incident rays are those which fall upon the surface of a body.

Reflected rays are those which are thrown off from a body.

Parallel rays are such as proceed equally distant from each other
through their whole course.

Converging rays are such as approach and tend to unite at any one
point, as at b.  Fig. 3.

Diverging rays are those which continue to recede from each other, as
at e.  Fig. 3.

A Focus is that point at which converging rays meet.

MOTION OF LIGHT--Rays of light are thrown off from luminous bodies in
every direction, but always in straight lines, which cross each other
at every point; but the particles of which each ray consists are so
minute that the rays do not appear to be impeded by each other.  A ray
of light passing through an aperture into a dark room, proceeds in a
straight line; a fact of which any one may be convinced by going into a
darkened room and admitting light only through a small aperture.

[Illustration: Fig. 1 (hipho_1.gif)]

Light also moves with great velocity, but becomes fainter as it recedes
from the source from which it eminates; in other words, diverging rays
of light diminish in intensity as the square of the distance increases.
For instance let a fig. 1, represent the luminous body from which light
proceeds, and suppose three square boards, b. c. d. severally one,
four and sixteen square inches in size be placed; b one foot, c two
feet, and d four feet from a, it will be perceived that the smallest
board b will throw c into shadow; that is, obstruct all rays of light
that would otherwise fall on c, and if b were removed c would in like
manner hide the light from d--Now, if b recieve as much light as would
fall on c whose surface is four times as large, the light must be four
times as powerful and sixteen times as powerful as that which would
fall on the second and third boards, because the same quantity of light
is diffused over a space four and sixteen times greater.  These same
rays may be collected and their intensity again increased.

Rays of light are reflected from one surface to another; Refracted, or
bent, as they pass from the surface of one transparent medium to
another; and Inflected, or turned from their course, by the attraction
of opaque bodies.  From the first we derive the principles on which
mirrors are constructed; to the second we are indebted for the power of
the lenses, and the blessings of sight,--for the light acts upon the
retina of the eye in the same manner as on the lens of a camera.  The
latter has no important bearing upon our subject.

When a ray of light falls perpendicularly upon an opaque body, it is
reflected bark in the same line in which it proceeds; in this case the
reflected ray returns in the same path the incident ray traversed; but
when a ray falls obliquely, it is reflected obliquely, that is, it is
thrown off in opposite direction, and as far from the perpendicular as
was the incident ray, as shown at Fig. 2; a representing the incident
ray and b the reflected.  The point, or angle c made by the incident
ray, at the surface of the reflector e f, with a line c d,
perpendicular to that surface, is called the angle of incidence, while
the angle formed by the reflected ray b and the perpendicular line d is
called the angle of reflection, and these angles are always equal.

[Illustration: Fig. 2 (hipho_2.gif)]

It is by this reflection of light that objects are made visible; but
unless light falls directly upon the eye they are invisible, and are
not sensibly felt until after a certain series of operations upon the
various coverings and humors of the eye.  Smooth and polished surfaces
reflect light most powerfully, and send to the eye the images of the
objects from which the light proceeded before reflection.  Glass, which
is transparent--transmitting light--would be of no use to us as a
mirror, were it not first coated on one side with a metalic amalgam,
which interrupts the rays in their passage from the glass into the air,
and throws them either directly in the incident line, or in an oblique
direction.  The reason why trees, rocks and animals are not all
mirrors, reflecting other forms instead of their own, is, that their
surfaces are uneven, and rays of light reflected from an uneven surface
are diffused in all directions.

Parallel rays falling obliquely upon a plane mirror are reflected
parallel; converging rays, with the same degree of convergence; and
diverging rays equally divergent.

Stand before a mirror and your image is formed therein, and appears to
be as far behind the glass as you are before it, making the angle of
reflection equal to that of incidence, as before stated.  The incident
ray and the reflected ray form, together, what is called the passage of
reflection, and this will therefore make the actual distance of an
image to appear as far again from the eye as it really is.  Any object
which reflects light is called a radiant.  The point behind a
reflecting surface, from which they appear to diverge, is called the
virtual focus.

Rays of light being reflected at the same angle at which they fall upon
a mirror, two persons can stand in such a position that each can see
the image of the other without seeing his own.  Again; you may see your
whole figure in a mirror half your length, but if you stand before one
a few inches shorter the whole cannot be reflected, as the incident ray
which passes from your feet into the mirror in the former case, will in
the latter fall under it.  Images are always reversed in mirrors.

Convex mirrors reflect light from a rounded surface and disperse the
rays in every direction, causing parallel rays to diverge, diverging
rays to diverge more, and converging rays to converge less--they
represent objects smaller than they really are--because the angle
formed by the reflected ray is rendered more acute by a convex than by
a plane surface, and it is the diminishing of the visual angle, by
causing rays of light to be farther extended before they meet in a
point, which produces the image of convex mirrors.  The greater the
convexity of a mirror, the more will the images of the objects be
diminished, and the nearer will they appear to the surface.  These
mirrors furnish science with many curious and pleasing facts.

Concave mirrors are the reverse of convex; the latter being rounded
outwards, the former hollowed inwards--they render rays of light more
converging--collect rays instead of dispersing them, and magnify
objects while the convex diminishes them.

Rays of light may be collected in the focus of a mirror to such
intensity as to melt metals.  The ordinary burning glass is an
illustration of this fact; although the rays of light are refracted, or
passed through the glass and concentrated into a focus beneath.

When incident rays are parallel, the reflected rays converge to a
focus, but when the incident rays proceed from a focus, or are
divergent, they are reflected parallel.  It is only when an object is
nearer to a concave mirror than its centre of concavity, that its image
is magnified; for when the object is farther from the mirror, this
centre will appear less than the object, and in an inverted position.

The centre of concavity in a concave mirror, is an imaginary point
placed in the centre of a circle formed by continuing the boundary of
the concavity of the mirror from any one point of the edge to another
parallel to and beneath it.

REFRACTION OF LIGHT:--I now pass to the consideration of the passage of
light through bodies.

A ray of light failing perpendicularly through the air upon a surface
of glass or water passes on in a straight line through the body; but if
it, in passing from one medium to another of different density, fall
obliquely, it is bent from its direct course and recedes from it,
either towards the right or left, and this bending is called
refraction; (see Fig. 3, b.) If a ray of light passes from a rarer into
a denser medium it is refracted towards a perpendicular in that medium;
but if it passes from a denser into rarer it is bent further from a
perpendicular in that medium.  Owing to this bending of the rays of
light the angles of refraction and incidence are never equal.

Transparent bodies differ in their power of bending light--as a general
rule, the refractive power is proportioned to the density--but the
chemical constitution of bodies as well as their density, is found to
effect their refracting power.  Inflammable bodies possess this power
to a great degree.

The sines of the angle of incidence and refraction (that is, the
perpendicular drawn from the extremity of an arc to the diameter of a
circle,) are always in the same ratio; viz:  from air into water, the
sine of the angle of refraction is nearly as four to three, whatever be
the position of the ray with respect to the refracting surface.  From
air into sulphur, the sine of the angle of refraction is as two to
one--therefore the rays of light cannot be refracted whenever the sine
of the angle of refraction becomes equal to the radius* of a circle,
and light falling very obliquely upon a transparent medium ceases to be
refracted; this is termed total reflection.

* The RADIUS of a circle is a straight line passing from the centre to
the circumference.

Since the brightness of a reflected image depends upon the quantity of
light, it is quite evident that those images which arise from total
reflection are by far the most vivid, as in ordinary cases of
reflection a portion of light is absorbed.

I should be pleased to enter more fully into this branch of the science
of optics, but the bounds to which I am necessarily limited in a work
of this kind will not admit of it.  In the next chapter, however, I
shall give a synopsis of Mr. Hunt's treatise on the "Influence of the
Solar Rays on Compound Bodies, with especial reference to their
Photographic application"--a work which should be in the hands of every
Daguerreotypist, and which I hope soon to see republished in this
country.  I will conclude this chapter with a brief statement of the
principles upon which the Photographic art is founded.

SOLAR and Stellar light contains three kinds of rays, viz:

1.  Colorific, or rays of color.

2.  Calorific, or rays of heat.

3.  Chemical rays, or those which produce chemical effects.

On the first and third the Photographic principle depends.  In
explaining this principle the accompanying wood cuts, (figs. 3 and 4)
will render it more intelligible.

If a pencil of the sun's rays fall upon a prism, it is bent in passing
through the transparent medium; and some rays being more refracted than
others, we procure an elongated image of the luminous beam, exhibiting
three distinct colors, red, yellow and blue, which are to be regarded
as primitives--and from their interblending, seven, as recorded by
Newton, and shown in the accompanying wood cut.  These rays being
absorbed, or reflected differently by various bodies, give to nature
the charm of color.  Thus to the eve is given the pleasure we derive in
looking upon the green fields and forests, the enumerable varieties of
flowers, the glowing ruby, jasper, topaz, amethist, and emerald, the
brilliant diamond, and all the rich and varied hues of nature, both
animate and inanimate.

[Illustration: Fig. 3 (hipho_3.gif)]

Now, if we allow this prismatic spectrum (b. Fig. 3.) to fall upon any
surface (as at c.) prepared with a sensitive photographic compound, we
shall find that the chemical effect produced bears no relation to the
intensity of the light of any particular colored ray, but that, on the
contrary, it is dispersed over the largest portion of the spectrum,
being most energetic in the least luminous rays, and ever active over
an extensive space, where no traces of light can be detected.  Fig. 4,
will give the student a better idea of this principle.  It is a copy of
the kind of impression which the spectrum, spoken of, would make on a
piece of paper covered with a very sensitive photographic preparation.
The white space a.  corresponds with the most luminous, or yellow ray,
(5, Fig. 3) over limits of which all chemical change is prevented.  A
similar action is also produced by the lower end of the red ray c; but
in the upper portion, however we find a decided change (as at d). The
most active chemical change, you will perceive, is produced by the rays
above the yellow a; viz. 4, 3, 2 and 1 (as at b) the green (4) being
the least active, and the blue (3) and violet (1) rays the most so, the
action still continuing far beyond the point b which is the end of the
luminous image.

[Illustration: Fig. 4 (hipho_4.gif)]

Suppose we wish to copy by the Daguerreotype, or Calotype process, any
objects highly colored--blue, red and yellow, for instance
predominating--the last of course reflects the most light, the blue the
least; but the rays from the blue surface will make the most intense
impression, whilst the red radiations are working very slowly, and the
yellow remains entirely inactive.  This accounts for the difficulty
experienced in copying bright green foliage, or warmly colored
portraits; a large portion of the yellow and red rays entering into the
composition of both--and the imperfections of a Daguerreotype portrait
of a person with a freckled face depends upon the same cause.

A yellow, hazy atmosphere, even when the light is very bright, will
effectually prevent any good photographic result--and in the height of
summer, with the most sensative process, it not unfrequently happens
that the most annoying failures arise from this agency of a yellow
medium.  A building painted of a yellow color, which may reflect the
sun's rays directly into the operator's room will have the same effect.
Daguerreotypists, being ignorant of these facts, are very apt to charge
their want of success to the plates, or chemicals, or any thing but the
real cause; and it would be well to bear these facts constantly in mind
and as far as possible avoid them.  This, may be accomplished, in a
measure, by a choice of location or by having the glass of your windows
tinged with blue; or a screen of thin blue paper may be interposed
between the light and sitter.  In selecting subjects, all striking
contrasts in color should be avoided, and sitters for portraits should
be cautioned not to wear anything that may produce the effect spoken
of--dark dresses always being the best.

The action of light both combines and decomposes bodies.  For instance,
chlorine and hydrogen will remain in a glass vessel without alteration
if kept in the dark; but if exposed to the rays of the sun, they
immediately enter into combination, and produce hydrochloric acid.  On
the other hand, if colorless nitric acid be exposed to the sun, it
becomes yellow, then changes to red, and oxygen is liberated by the
partial decomposition effected by the solar rays.

Of the organic substances none are more readily acted upon by light
than the various combinations of silver.

Of these some are more, and others less sensitive.  If Chloride of
silver, which is a white precipitate formed by adding chloride of
sodium (common salt) to a solution of nitrate of silver, be exposed to
diffused light, it speedily assumes a violet tint, and ultimately
becomes nearly black.  With iodide of silver, bromide of silver,
ammonio-nitrate of silver, and other salts of this metal, the result
will be much the same.

Some bodies, which under the influence of light, undergo chemical
changes, have the power of restoring themselves to their original
condition in the dark.  This is more remarkably displayed in the iodide
of platinum, which readily recieves a photogenic image by darkening
over the exposed surfaces, but speedily loses it by bleaching in the
dark.  The ioduret of Daguerre's plate, and some other iodides, exhibit
the same peculiarity--This leads us to the striking fact, that bodies
which have undergone a change of estate under the influence of
day-light have some latent power by which they can renovate themselves.
Possibly the hours of night are as necessary to inanimate nature as
they are to the animate.  During the day, an excitement which we do not
heed, unless in a state of disease, is maintained by the influence of
light and the hours of repose, during which the equilibrium is
restored, are absolutely necessary to the continuance of health.

Instead of a few chemical compounds of gold and silver, which at first
were alone supposed to be photographic, we are now aware that copper,
platinum, lead, nickel, and indeed, probably all the elements, are
equally liably to change under the sun's influence.  This fact may be
of benefit to engravers, for if steel can be made to take photographic
impressions, the more laborious process of etching may be dispensed
with.  In fact, in the latter part of this work, a process is described
for etching and taking printed impressions from Daguerreotype plates.
As yet this process has produced no decided beneficial results--but
future experiments may accomplish some practical discovery of intrinsic
value to the art of engraving.

A very simple experiment will prove how essential light is to the
coloring of the various species comprising the vegetable and animal
kingdoms.  If we transplant any shrub from the light of day into a dark
cellar, we will soon see it lose its bright green color, and become
perfectly white.

Another effect of light is that it appears to impart to bodies some
power by which they more readily enter into chemical combination with
others.  We have already said that chlorine and hydrogen, if kept in
the dark, will remain unaltered; but if the chlorine alone be
previously exposed to the sun, the chlorine thus solarised will unite
with the hydrogen in the dark.  Sulphate of iron will throw down gold
or silver from their solutions slowly in the dark; but if either
solution be first exposed to sunshine, and the mixture be then made, in
the dark, the precipitation takes place instantly.  Here is again,
evidence of either an absorption of some material agent from the
sunbeam, or an alteration in the chemical constitution of the body.  It
was from understanding these principles and applying them that
philosophers were enabled to produce the Calotype, Daguerreotype, &c.
For the effects and action of light on the camera, see Chapter V.

Some advances have been made towards producing Photographic impressions
in color--the impossibility of which some of our best and oldest
artists have most pertinaciously maintained.  The colored image of the
spectrum has been most faithfully copied, ray for ray, on paper spread
with the juice of the Cochorus Japonica, (a species of plant) and the
fluoride of silver; and on silver plate covered with a thin film of
chloride.  The day may be still remote when this much to be desired
desideratum shall be accomplished in portrait taking; but I am led to
hope that future experiments may master the secret which now causes it
to be looked upon, by many, as an impossibility.

That great advantages have resulted, and that greater still will result
from the discovery of the Photographic art, few will deny.  The
faithful manner in which it copies nature, even to the most minute
details, renders it of much value to the painter; but a few minutes
sufficing to take a view that formerly would have occupied several
days.  Its superiority in portraits, over miniature or oil painting has
been tacitly acknowledged by the thousands who employ it to secure
their own, or a friends likeness, and by the steady increase in the
number of artists who are weekly, aye daily springing up in every town
and village in the land.



CHAP. III.

SYNOPSIS OF MR. HUNT'S TREATISE ON "THE INFLUENCE OF THE SOLAR RAYS ON
COMPOUND BODIES, WITH ESPECIAL REFERENCE TO THEIR PHOTOGRAPHIC
APPLICATION."


OXIDE OF SILVER exposed for a few hours to good sunshine, passes into a
more decided olive color, than characterises it when first prepared by
precipitation from nitrate of silver.  Longer exposure renders this
color very much lighter, and the covered parts, are found much darker,
than those on which the light has acted directly.  In some instances
where the oxide of silver has been spread on the paper a decided
whitening process in some parts, after a few days exposure, is noticed.
Oxide of silver dissolved in ammonia is a valuable photographic fluid;
one application of a strong solution forming an exceedingly sensitive
surface.  The pictures on this paper are easily fixed by salt or weak
ammonia.

NITRATE OF SILVER.--This salt in a state of purity, does not appear to
be sensibly affected by light, but the presence of the smallest portion
of organic matter renders it exceedingly liable to change under
luminous influence.

If a piece of nitrated paper is placed upon hot iron, or held near the
fire, it will be found that at a heat just below that at which the
paper chars, the salt is decomposed.  Where the heat is greatest, the
silver is revived, and immediately around it, the paper becomes a deep
blue; beyond this a pretty decided green color results, and beyond the
green, a yellow or yellow brown stain is made.  This exhibits a
remarkable analogy between heat and light,--before spoken of in chap.
II--and is of some practical importance in the preparation of the paper.

PRISMATIC ANALYSIS.--The method of accomplishing the prismatic
decomposition of rays of light by the spectrum has already been
described on pages 22 and 23.  The color of the impressed spectrum, on
paper washed with nitrate of silver, is at first, a pale brown, which
passes slowly into a deeper shade; that portion corresponding with the
blue rays becoming a blue brown; and under the violet of a peculiar
pinkey shade, a very decided green tint, on the point which corresponds
with the least refrangible blue rays, may be observed, its limits of
action being near the centre of the yellow ray, and its maximum about
the centre of the blue, although the action up to the edge of the
violet ray is continued with very little diminution of effect; beyond
this point the action is very feeble.

When the spectrum is made to act on paper which has been previously
darkened, by exposure to sunshine under cupro-sulphate of ammonia, the
phenomena are materially different.  The photographic spectrum is
lengthened out on the red or negative side by a faint but very visible
red portion, which extends fully up to the end of the red rays, as seen
by the naked eye.  The tint of the general spectrum, too, instead of
brown is dark grey, passing, however, at its most refracted or positive
end into a ruddy brown.

In its Photographic application, the nitrate of silver is the most
valuable of the salts of that metal, as from it most of the other
argentine compounds can be prepared, although it is not of itself
sufficiently sensible to light to render it of much use.

CHLORIDE OF SILVER.--This salt of silver, whether in its precipitated
state, or when fused, changes its color to a fine bluish grey by a very
short exposure to the sun's rays.  If combined with a small quantity of
nitrate, the change is more rapid, it attains a deep brown, then slowly
passes into a fine olive, and eventually, after a few weeks, the
metalic silver is seen to be revived on the surface of the salt.  Great
differences of color are produced on chlorides of silver precipitated
by different muriates.  Nearly every variety in combination with the
nitrate, becomes at last of the same olive color, the following
examples, therefore, have reference to a few minutes exposure, only, to
good sunshine; it must also be recollected that the chloride of silver
in these cases is contaminated with the precipitant.

Muriate of ammonia precipitates chloride to darken to a fine chocolate
brown, whilst muriate of lime produces a brick-red color.  Muriates of
potash and soda afford a precipitate, which darkens speedily to a pure
dark brown, and muriatic acid, or aqueous chlorine, do not appear to
increase the darkening power beyond the lilac to which the pure
chloride of silver changes by exposure.  This difference of color
appears to be owing to the admixture of the earth or alkali used with
the silver salt.

The prismatic impression on paper spread with the chloride of silver is
often very beautifully tinted, the intensity of color varying with the
kind of muriate used.  Spread paper with muriate of ammonia or baryta
and you obtain a range of colors nearly corresponding with the natural
hues of the prismatic spectrum.  Under favorable circumstances the mean
red ray, leaves a red impression, which passes into a green over the
space occupied by the yellow rays.  Above this a leaden hue is
observed, and about the mean blue ray, where the action is greatest, it
rapidly passes through brown into black, and through the most
refrangible rays it gradually declines into a bluish brown, which tint
is continued throughout the invisible rays.  At the least refrangible
end of the spectrum, the very remarkable phenomenon has been observed,
of the extreme red rays exerting a protecting influence, and preserving
the paper from that change, which it would otherwise undergo, under the
influence of the dispersed light which always surrounds the spectrum.
Not only the extreme red ray exerts this very peculiar property, but
the ordinary red ray through nearly its whole length.

In photographic drawing this salt is of the utmost importance.  Mr.
Talbot's application of it will be given hereafter in another portion
of this work.

IODIDE OF SILVER--Perfectly pure, undergoes very little change under
the influence of light or heat; but if a very slight excess of the
nitrate of silver be added it becomes infinitely more sensitive than
the chloride.

The spectrum impressed upon paper prepared with a weak solution of the
hydriodate of potash presents some very remarkable peculiarities.  The
maximum of intensity is found at the edge of the most refrangible
violet rays, or a little beyond it, varying slightly according to the
kind of paper used, and the quantity of free nitrate of silver present.
The action commences at a point nearly coincident with the mean red of
the luminous spectrum, where it gives a dull ash or lead color, while
the most refrangible rays impress a ruddy snuff-brown, the change of
tint coming on rather suddenly about the end of the blue or beginning
of the violet rays of the luminous spectrum.  Beyond the extreme violet
rays, the action rapidly diminishes, but the darkening produced by
these invisible rays, extends a very small space beyond the point at
which they cease to act on the chloride of silver.

In its photographic application, it is, alone, of very little use; but
in combination with other reagents it becomes exquisitely sensitive.
With gallic acid and the ferrocyanate of potash it forms two of the
most sensitive photographic solutions with which we are acquainted.
These are used in the calotype process.

IODURET OF SILVER.--If upon a plate of polished silver we place a small
piece of iodine, and apply the heat of a lamp beneath the plate for a
moment, a system of rings is speedily formed.  The first ring, which
spreading constantly forms the exterior of the circle, is of a bright
yellow color; within this, there arises, successively, rings of green,
red and blue colors, and then again a fine yellow circle, centred by a
greyish spot on the place occupied by the iodine.  On exposing these to
the light, the outer yellow circle almost instantly changes color, the
others slowly, in the order of their position, the interior yellow
circle resisting for a long time the solar influence.  These rings must
be regarded as films of the ioduret of silver, varying, not only in
thickness, but in the more or less perfect states of combination in
which the iodine and metal are.  The exterior circle is an ioduret in a
very loose state of chemical agregation; the attractive forces increase
as we proceed towards the centre, where a well formed ioduret, or
probably a true iodide of silver, is formed, which is acted upon by
sunlight with difficulty.  The exterior and most sensitive film
constitutes the surface of Daguerreotype plates.  The changes which
these colored rings undergo are remarkable; by a few minutes exposure
to sunlight, an inversion of nearly all the colors takes place, the two
first rings becoming a deep olive green; and a deep blue inclining to
black.

The nature of the change which the ioduret of silver undergoes on
Daguerreotype plates, through the action of light, Mr. Hunt considers
to be a decided case of decomposition, and cites several circumstances
in proof of his position.  These with other facts given by Mr. Hunt in
his great work on the Photographic art, but to voluminous to include in
a volume of the size to which I am obliged to confine myself, should be
thoroughly studied by all Daguerreotypists.

PRISMATIC ANALYSIS.--The most refrangible portion of the spectrum, (on
a Daguerreotype plate) appears, after the plate has been exposed to the
vapor of mercury, to have impressed its colors; the light and delicate
film of mercury, which covers that portion, assuming a fine blue tint
about the central parts, which are gradually shaded off into a pale
grey; and this is again surrounded by a very delicate rose hue, which
is lost in a band of pure white.  Beyond this a protecting influence is
powerfully exerted; and notwithstanding the action of the dispersed
light, which is very evident over the plate, a line is left, perfectly
free from mercurial vapor, and which, consequently, when viewed by a
side light, appears quite dark.  The green rays are represented by a
line of a corresponding tint, considerably less in size than the
luminous green rays.  The yellow rays appear to be without action, or
to act negatively, the space upon which they fall being protected from
the mercurial vapor; and it consequently is seen as a dark band.  A
white line of vapor marks the place of the orange rays.  The red rays
effect the sensitive surface in a peculiar manner; and we have the
mercurial vapor, assuming a molecular arrangement which gives to it a
fine rose hue; this tint is surrounded by a line of white vapor, shaded
at the lowest extremity with a very soft green.  Over the space
occupied by the extreme red rays, a protecting influence is again
exerted; the space is retained free from mercurial vapor and the band
is found to surround the whole of the least refrangible rays, and to
unite itself with the band which surrounds the rays of greatest
refrangibility.  This band is not equally well defined throughout its
whole extent.  It is most evident from the extreme red to the green; it
fades in passing through the blue, and increases again, as it leaves
the indigo, until beyond the invisible chemical rays it is nearly as
strong as it is at the calorific end of the spectrum.

Images on Daguerreotype plates which have been completely obliterated
by rubbing may be restored, by placing it in a tolerably strong
solution of iodine in water.

BROMIDE OF SILVER.--This salt, like the iodide, does not appear to be
readily changed by the action of light; but when combined with the
nitrate of silver it forms a very sensitive photographic preparation.

Paper prepared with this salt, blackens over its whole extent with
nearly equal intensity, when submitted to the prismatic spectrum.  The
most characteristic peculiarity of the spectrum is its extravagant
length.  Instead of terminating at the mean yellow ray, the darkened
portion extends down to the very extremity of the visible red rays.  In
tint it is pretty uniformly of a grey-black over its whole extent,
except that a slight fringe of redness is perceptible at the least
refracted end.  Beyond the red ray, an extended space is protected from
the agency of the dispersed light, and its whiteness maintained; thus
confirming the evidence of some chemical power in action, over a space
beyond the luminous spectrum, which corresponds with the rays of the
least refrangibility.

This salt is extensively used in photographic drawing.

PREPARATIONS OF GOLD.--Chloride of Gold, freed from an excess of acid
is slowly changed under the action of light; a regularly increasing
darkness taking place until it becomes purple, the first action of the
light being to whiten the paper, which, if removed from the light at
this stage, will gradually darken and eventually develope the picture.
This process may be quickened by placing the paper in cold water.

Chloride of gold with nitrate of silver gives a precipitate of a yellow
brown color.  Paper impregnated with the acetate of lead, when washed
with perfectly neutral chloride of gold, acquires a brownish-yellow
hue.  The first impression of light seems rather to whiten than darken
the paper, by discharging the original color, and substituting for it a
pale greyish tint, which by slow degrees increases to a dark slate
color; but if arrested, while yet, not more than a moderate ash grey,
and held in a current of steam, the color of the parts acted upon by
light--and of that only--darkens immediately to a deep purple.

Here I must leave the subject of the action of light upon metalic
compounds--referring to Mr. Hunts work for any further information the
student may desire on the other metals--as I find myself going beyond
my limits.  I cannot, however, entirely dismiss the subject without
giving a few examples of the action of light on the juices of plants,
some of which produce very good photographic effect.

CORCHORUS JAPONICA--The juice of the flowers of this plant impart a
fine yellow color to paper, and, so far as ascertained, is the most
sensitive of any vegetable preparation; but owing to its continuing to
change color even in the dark, photographic images taken on paper
prepared with it soon fade out.

WALL FLOWER.--This flower yields a juice, when expressed with alcohol,
from which subsides, on standing, a bright yellow finely divided
faecula, leaving a greenish-yellow transparent liquid, only slightly
colored supernatant.  The faecula spreads well on paper, and is very
sensitive to light, but appears at the same time to undergo a sort of
chromatic analysis, and to comport itself as if composed of two very
distinct coloring principles, very differently affected.  The one on
which the intensity and sub-orange tint of the color depends, is
speedily destroyed, but the paper is not thereby fully whitened.  A
paler yellow remains as a residual tint, and this on continued exposure
to the light, slowly darkens to brown.  Exposed to the spectrum, the
paper is first reduced nearly to whiteness in the region of the blue
and violet rays.  More slowly, an insulated solar image is whitened in
the less refrangible portion of the red.  Continue the exposure, and a
brown impression begins to be percieved in the midst of the white
streak, which darkens slowly over the region between the lower blue and
extreme violet rays.

THE RED POPPY yields a very beautiful red color, which is entirely
destroyed by light.  When perfectly dried on paper the color becomes
blue.  This blue color is speedily discharged by exposure to the sun's
rays, and papers prepared with it afford very interesting
photographs.--  Future experiments will undoubtedly more fully develope
the photogenic properties of flowers, and practically apply them.

Certain precautions are necessary in extracting the coloring matter of
flowers.  The petals of fresh flowers, carefully selected, are crushed
to a pulp in a mortar, either alone or with the addition of a little
alcohol, and the juice expressed by squeezing the pulp in a clean linen
or cotton cloth.  It is then to be spread upon paper with a flat brush,
and dried in the air.  If alcohol be not added, it must be applied
immediately, as the air changes or destroys the color instantly.

Most flowers give out their coloring matter to alcohol or water--but
the former is found to weaken, and in some cases to discharge
altogether these colors; but they are in most cases restored in drying.
Paper tinged with vegetable colors must be kept perfectly dry and in
darkness.

To secure an eveness of tint on paper it should be first moistened on
the back by sponging, and blotting off with bibulous paper.  It should
then be pinned on a board, the moist side downwards, so that two of its
edges--the right and lower ones--project a little over those of the
board.  Incline the board twenty or thirty degrees to the horizon, and
apply the tincture with a brush in strokes from right to left, taking
care not to go over the edges which rests on the board, but to pass
clearly over those that project; and also observing to carry the tint
from below upwards by quick sweeping strokes, leaving no dry spaces
between them.  Cross these with other strokes from above downwards,
leaving no floating liquid on the paper.  Dry as quickly as possible,
avoiding, however, such heat as may injure the tint.



CHAP. IV.

A FEW HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS TO DAGUERREOTYPISTS.


There are very few who may not be capable of practising the
Photographic art, either on paper, or metalic plates--but, like all
other professions, some are more clever in its various processes than
others.

Impatience is a great drawback to perfect success, and combined with
laziness is a decided enemy.  Besides this, no one can excel in
Photography who does not possess a natural taste for the fine arts, who
is not quick in discerning grace and beauty--is regardless of the
principles of perspective, foreshortening and other rules of drawing,
and who sets about it merely for the sake of gain--without the least
ambition to rise to the first rank, both in its practice and theory.
There is no profession or trade in which a slovenly manner will not
show itself, and none where its effects will be more apparent than this.

In order to be great in any pursuit, we must be ourselves, and keep all
things, in order.  In your show and reception rooms, let neatness
prevail; have your specimens so placed--leaning slightly forward--as
to obtain the strongest light upon them, and at the same time prevent
that glassiness of appearance which detracts so materially from the
effect they are intended to produce.  If possible, let the light be of
a north-western aspect, mellowed by curtains of a semitransparent hue.
Your show-cases, at the door, should be kept well cleaned.  I have
often been disgusted while attempting to examine portraits in the cases
of our artists, at the greasy coating and marks of dirty fingers upon
the glass and frame enclosing them.  Believe it, many a good customer
is lost for no other reason.

In your operating room, dust should be carefully excluded.  It should
be furnished with nothing apt to collect and retain dust; a carpet is
therefore not only a useless article, but very improper.  A bare floor
is to be prefered; but if you must cover it use matting.  There is no
place about your establishment where greater care should be taken to
have order and cleanliness; for it will prevent many failures often
attributed to other causes.  "A place for every thing, and every thing
in its place," should be an absolute maxim with all artists.  Do not
oblige the ladies, on going away from your rooms, to say--"That H. is a
slovenly man; see how my dress is ruined by sitting down in a chair
that looked as if it had just come out of a porter house kitchen and
had not been cleaned for six months."

In choosing your operating room, obtain one with a north-western
aspect, if possible; and either with, or capable of having attached, a
large skylight.  Good pictures may be taken without the sky-light, but
not the most pleasing or effective.

A very important point to be observed, is to keep the camera perfectly
free from dust.  The operator should be careful to see that the
slightest particle be removed, for the act of inserting the
plate-holder will set it in motion, if left, and cause those little
black spots on the plate, by which an otherwise good picture is
spoiled.  The camera should be so placed as to prevent the sun shining
into the lenses.

In taking portraits, the conformation of the sitter should be minutely
studied to enable you to place her or him in a position the most
graceful and easy to be obtained.  The eyes should be fixed on some
object a little above the camera, and to one side--but never into, or
on the instrument, as some direct; the latter generally gives a fixed,
silly, staring, scowling or painful expression to the face.  Care
should also be taken, that the hands and feet, in whatever position,
are not too forward or back ward from the face when that is in good
focus.

If any large surface of white is present, such as the shirt front, or
lady's handkerchief, a piece of dark cloth (a temporary bosom of
nankeen is best,) may be put over it, but quickly withdrawn when the
process is about two thirds finished.

A very pleasing effect is given to portraits, by introducing, behind
the sitter, an engraving or other picture--if a painting, avoid those
in which warm and glowing tints predominate.  The subject of these
pictures may be applicable to the taste or occupation of the person
whose portrait you are taking.  This adds much to the interest of the
picture, which is otherwise frequently dull, cold and inanimate.

Mr. J. H. Whitehurst of Richmond, Va., has introduced a revolving
background, which is set in motion during the operation