The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Well at the World's End: A Tale
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Well at the World's End: A Tale

Author: William Morris


        
Release date: October 1, 1994 [eBook #169]
                Most recently updated: March 31, 2025

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/169

Credits: Produced by John Hamm.  HTML version by Al Haines.


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WELL AT THE WORLD'S END: A TALE ***




The Well at the World's End


by

William Morris




Table of Contents


BOOK ONE  The Road Unto Love

Chapter

   1  The Sundering of the Ways
   2  Ralph Goeth Back Home to the High House
   3  Ralph Cometh to the Cheaping-Town
   4  Ralph Rideth the Downs
   5  Ralph Cometh to Higham-on-the-Way
   6  Ralph Goeth His Ways From the Abbey of St. Mary at Higham
   7  The Maiden of Bourton Abbas
   8  Ralph Cometh to the Wood Perilous.  An Adventure Therein
   9  Another Adventure in the Wood Perilous
  10  A Meeting and a Parting in the Wood Perilous
  11  Now Must Ralph Ride For It
  12  Ralph Entereth Into the Burg of the Four Friths
  13  The Streets of the Burg of the Four Friths
  14  What Ralph Heard of the Matters of the Burg of the Four Friths
  15  How Ralph Departed From the Burg of the Four Friths
  16  Ralph Rideth the Wood Perilous Again
  17  Ralph Cometh to the House of Abundance
  18  Of Ralph in the Castle of Abundance
  19  Ralph Readeth in a Book Concerning the Well at the World's End
  20  Ralph Meeteth a Man in the Wood
  21  Ralph Weareth Away Three Days Uneasily
  22  An Adventure in the Wood
  23  The Leechcraft of the Lady
  24  Supper and Slumber in the Woodland Hall



BOOK TWO  The Road Unto Trouble

   1  Ralph Meets With Love in the Wilderness
   2  They Break Their Fast in the Wildwood
   3  The Lady Telleth Ralph of the Past Days of Her Life
   4  The Lady Tells of Her Deliverance
   5  Yet More of the Lady's Story
   6  The Lady Tells Somewhat of Her Doings After She Left the Wilderness
   7  The Lady Tells of the Strife and Trouble That Befell After Her Coming
   8  The Lady Maketh an End of Her Tale
   9  They Go On Their Way Once More
  10  Of the Desert-House and the Chamber of Love in the Wilderness
  11  Ralph Cometh Out of the Wilderness
  12  Ralph Falleth in With Friends and Rideth to Whitwall
  13  Richard Talketh With Ralph Concerning the Well at the World's End.
  14  Ralph Falleth in With Another Old Friend
  15  Ralph Dreams a Dream Or Sees a Vision
  16  Of the Tales of Swevenham
  17  Richard Bringeth Tidings of Departing
  18  Ralph Departeth From Whitwall With the Fellowship of Clement Chapman
  19  Master Clement Tells Ralph Concerning the Lands Whereunto They Were
  20  They Come to the Mid-Mountain Guest-House
  21  A Battle in the Mountains
  22  Ralph Talks With Bull Shockhead
  23  Of the Town of Cheaping Knowe
  24  Ralph Heareth More Tidings of the Damsel
  25  The Fellowship Comes to Whiteness
  26  They Ride the Mountains Toward Goldburg
  27  Clement Tells of Goldburg
  28  Now They Come to Goldburg
  29  Of Goldburg and the Queen Thereof
  30  Ralph Hath Hope of Tidings Concerning the Well at the World's End
  31  The Beginning of the Road To Utterbol
  32  Ralph Happens on Evil Days
  33  Ralph is Brought on the Road Towards Utterbol
  34  The Lord of Utterbol Will Wot of Ralph's Might and Minstrelsy
  35  Ralph Cometh To the Vale of the Tower
  36  The Talk of Two Women Concerning Ralph
  37  How Ralph Justed With the Aliens
  38  A Friend Gives Ralph Warning
  39  The Lord of Utterbol Makes Ralph a Free Man
  40  They Ride Toward Utterness From Out of Vale Turris
  41  Redhead Keeps Tryst


BOOK THREE  The Road To The Well At World's End.

   1  An Adventure in the Wood Under the Mountains
   2  Ralph Rides the Wood Under the Mountains
   3  Ralph Meeteth With Another Adventure in the Wood Under the Mountain
   4  They Ride the Wood Under the Mountains
   5  They Come on the Sage of Swevenham
   6  Those Two Are Learned Lore by the Sage of Swevenham
   7  An Adventure by the Way
   8  They Come to the Sea of Molten Rocks
   9  They Come Forth From the Rock-Sea
  10  They Come to the Gate of the Mountains
  11  They Come to the Vale of Sweet Chestnuts
  12  Winter Amidst of the Mountains
  13  Of Ursula and the Bear
  14  Now Come the Messengers of the Innocent Folk
  15  They Come to the Land of the Innocent Folk
  16  They Come to the House of the Sorceress
  17  They Come Through the Woodland to the Thirsty Desert
  18  They Come to the Dry Tree
  19  They Come Out of the Thirsty Desert
  20  They Come to the Ocean Sea
  21  Now They Drink of the Well at the World's End
  22  Now They Have Drunk and Are Glad


BOOK FOUR  The Road Home

   1  Ralph and Ursula Come Back Again Through the Great Mountains
   2  They Hear New Tidings of Utterbol
   3  They Winter With the Sage; and Thereafter Come Again to Vale Turris
   4  A Feast in the Red Pavilion
   5  Bull Telleth of His Winning of the Lordship of Utterbol
   6  They Ride From Vale Turris.  Redhead Tells of Agatha
   7  Of Their Riding the Waste, and of a Battle Thereon
   8  Of Goldburg Again, and the Queen Thereof
   9  They Come to Cheaping Knowe Once More.  Of the King Thereof
  10  An Adventure on the Way to the Mountains
  11  They Come Through the Mountains Into the Plain
  12  The Roads Sunder Again
  13  They Come to Whitwall Again
  14  They Ride Away From Whitwall
  15  A Strange Meeting in the Wilderness
  16  They Come to the Castle of Abundance Once More
  17  They Fall in With That Hermit
  18  A Change of Days in the Burg of the Four Friths
  19  Ralph Sees Hampton and the Scaur
  20  They Come to the Gate of Higham By the Way
  21  Talk Between Those Two Brethren
  22  An Old Acquaintance Comes From the Down Country to See Ralph
  23  They Ride to Bear Castle
  24  The Folkmote of the Shepherds
  25  They Come to Wulstead
  26  Ralph Sees His Father and Mother Again
  27  Ralph Holds Converse With Katherine His Gossip
  28  Dame Katherine Tells of the Pair of Beads, and Whence She Had Them
  29  They Go Down to Battle in Upmeads
  30  Ralph Brings His Father and Mother to Upmeads
  31  Ralph Brings Ursula Home to the High House
  32  Yet a Few Words Concerning Ralph of Upmeads




BOOK ONE

The Road Unto Love



CHAPTER 1

The Sundering of the Ways


Long ago there was a little land, over which ruled a regulus or
kinglet, who was called King Peter, though his kingdom was but little.
He had four sons whose names were Blaise, Hugh, Gregory and Ralph: of
these Ralph was the youngest, whereas he was but of twenty winters and
one; and Blaise was the oldest and had seen thirty winters.

Now it came to this at last, that to these young men the kingdom of
their father seemed strait; and they longed to see the ways of other
men, and to strive for life.  For though they were king's sons, they
had but little world's wealth; save and except good meat and drink, and
enough or too much thereof; house-room of the best; friends to be merry
with, and maidens to kiss, and these also as good as might be; freedom
withal to come and go as they would; the heavens above them, the earth
to bear them up, and the meadows and acres, the woods and fair streams,
and the little hills of Upmeads, for that was the name of their country
and the kingdom of King Peter.

So having nought but this little they longed for much; and that the
more because, king's sons as they were, they had but scant dominion
save over their horses and dogs: for the men of that country were
stubborn and sturdy vavassors, and might not away with masterful
doings, but were like to pay back a blow with a blow, and a foul word
with a buffet.  So that, all things considered, it was little wonder if
King Peter's sons found themselves straitened in their little land:
wherein was no great merchant city; no mighty castle, or noble abbey of
monks:  nought but fair little halls of yeomen, with here and there a
franklin's court or a shield-knight's manor-house; with many a goodly
church, and whiles a house of good canons, who knew not the road to
Rome, nor how to find the door of the Chancellor's house.

So these young men wearied their father and mother a long while with
telling them of their weariness, and their longing to be gone: till at
last on a fair and hot afternoon of June King Peter rose up from the
carpet which the Prior of St. John's by the Bridge had given him (for
he had been sleeping thereon amidst the grass of his orchard after his
dinner) and he went into the hall of his house, which was called the
High House of Upmeads, and sent for his four sons to come to him.  And
they came and stood before his high-seat and he said:

"Sons, ye have long wearied me with words concerning your longing for
travel on the roads; now if ye verily wish to be gone, tell me when
would ye take your departure if ye had your choice?"

They looked at one another, and the three younger ones nodded at Blaise
the eldest:  so he began, and said:  "Saving the love and honour that
we have for thee, and also for our mother, we would be gone at once,
even with the noon's meat still in our bellies.  But thou art the lord
in this land, and thou must rule.  Have I said well, brethren?"  And
they all said "Yea, yea." Then said the king; "Good! now is the sun
high and hot; yet if ye ride softly ye may come to some good harbour
before nightfall without foundering your horses.  So come ye in an
hour's space to the Four-want-way, and there and then will I order your
departure."

The young men were full of joy when they heard his word; and they
departed and went this way and that, gathering such small matters as
each deemed that he needed, and which he might lightly carry with him;
then they armed themselves, and would bid the squires bring them their
horses; but men told them that the said squires had gone their ways
already to the Want-way by the king's commandment: so thither they went
at once a-foot all four in company, laughing and talking together
merrily.

It must be told that this Want-way aforesaid was but four furlongs from
the House, which lay in an ingle of the river called Upmeads Water
amongst very fair meadows at the end of the upland tillage; and the
land sloped gently up toward the hill-country and the unseen mountains
on the north; but to the south was a low ridge which ran along the
water, as it wound along from west to east.  Beyond the said ridge, at
a place whence you could see the higher hills to the south, that
stretched mainly east and west also, there was presently an end of the
Kingdom of Upmeads, though the neighbours on that side were peaceable
and friendly, and were wont to send gifts to King Peter.  But toward
the north beyond the Want-way King Peter was lord over a good stretch
of land, and that of the best; yet was he never a rich man, for he had
no freedom to tax and tail his folk, nor forsooth would he have used it
if he had; for he was no ill man, but kindly and of measure.  On these
northern marches there was war at whiles, whereas they ended in a great
forest well furnished of trees; and this wood was debateable, and King
Peter and his sons rode therein at their peril: but great plenty was
therein of all wild deer, as hart, and buck, and roe, and swine, and
bears and wolves withal.  The lord on the other side thereof was a
mightier man than King Peter, albeit he was a bishop, and a baron of
Holy Church.  To say sooth he was a close-fist and a manslayer; though
he did his manslaying through his vicars, the knights and men-at-arms
who held their manors of him, or whom he waged.

In that forest had King Peter's father died in battle, and his eldest
son also; therefore, being a man of peace, he rode therein but seldom,
though his sons, the three eldest of them, had both ridden therein and
ran therefrom valiantly.  As for Ralph the youngest, his father would
not have him ride the Wood Debateable as yet.

So came those young men to the Want-ways, and found their father
sitting there on a heap of stones, and over against him eight horses,
four destriers, and four hackneys, and four squires withal.  So they
came and stood before their father, waiting for his word, and wondering
what it would be.

Now spake King Peter:  "Fair sons, ye would go on all adventure to seek
a wider land, and a more stirring life than ye may get of me at home:
so be it!  But I have bethought me, that, since I am growing old and
past the age of getting children, one of you, my sons, must abide at
home to cherish me and your mother, and to lead our carles in war if
trouble falleth upon us.  Now I know not how to choose by mine own wit
which of you shall ride and which abide.  For so it is that ye are
diverse of your conditions; but the evil conditions which one of you
lacks the other hath, and the valiancy which one hath, the other lacks.
Blaise is wise and prudent, but no great man of his hands.  Hugh is a
stout rider and lifter, but headstrong and foolhardy, and over
bounteous a skinker; and Gregory is courteous and many worded, but
sluggish in deed; though I will not call him a dastard.  As for Ralph,
he is fair to look on, and peradventure he may be as wise as Blaise, as
valiant as Hugh, and as smooth-tongued as Gregory; but of all this we
know little or nothing, whereas he is but young and untried.  Yet may
he do better than you others, and I deem that he will do so.  All
things considered, then, I say, I know not how to choose between you,
my sons; so let luck choose for me, and ye shall draw cuts for your
roads; and he that draweth longest shall go north, and the next longest
shall go east, and the third straw shall send the drawer west; but as
to him who draweth the shortest cut, he shall go no whither but back
again to my house, there to abide with me the chances and changes of
life; and it is most like that this one shall sit in my chair when I am
gone, and be called King of Upmeads.

"Now, my sons, doth this ordinance please you?  For if so be it doth
not, then may ye all abide at home, and eat of my meat, and drink of my
cup, but little chided either for sloth or misdoing, even as it hath
been aforetime."

The young men looked at one another, and Blaise answered and said:
"Sir, as for me I say we will do after your commandment, to take what
road luck may show us, or to turn back home again." They all yeasaid
this one after the other; and then King Peter said: "Now before I draw
the cuts, I shall tell you that I have appointed the squires to go with
each one of you.  Richard the Red shall go with Blaise; for though he
be somewhat stricken in years, and wise, yet is he a fierce carle and a
doughty, and knoweth well all feats of arms.

"Lancelot Longtongue shall be squire to Hugh; for he is good of seeming
and can compass all courtesy, and knoweth logic (though it be of the
law and not of the schools), yet is he a proper man of his hands; as
needs must he be who followeth Hugh; for where is Hugh, there is
trouble and debate.

"Clement the Black shall serve Gregory:  for he is a careful carle, and
speaketh one word to every ten deeds that he doeth; whether they be
done with point and edge, or with the hammer in the smithy.

"Lastly, I have none left to follow thee, Ralph, save Nicholas
Longshanks; but though he hath more words than I have, yet hath he more
wisdom, and is a man lettered and far-travelled, and loveth our house
right well.

"How say ye, sons, is this to your liking?"

They all said "yea."  Then quoth the king; "Nicholas, bring hither the
straws ready dight, and I will give them my sons to draw."

So each young man came up in turn and drew; and King Peter laid the
straws together and looked at them, and said:

"Thus it is, Hugh goeth north with Lancelot, Gregory westward with
Clement." He stayed a moment and then said:  "Blaise fareth eastward
and Richard with him.  As for thee, Ralph my dear son, thou shalt back
with me and abide in my house and I shall see thee day by day; and thou
shalt help me to live my last years happily in all honour; and thy love
shall be my hope, and thy valiancy my stay."

Therewith he arose and threw his arm about the young man's neck; but he
shrank away a little from his father, and his face grew troubled; and
King Peter noted that, and his countenance fell, and he said:

"Nay nay, my son; grudge not thy brethren the chances of the road, and
the ill-hap of the battle.  Here at least for thee is the bounteous
board and the full cup, and the love of kindred and well-willers, and
the fellowship of the folk.  O well is thee, my son, and happy shalt
thou be!"

But the young man knit his brows and said no word in answer.

Then came forward those three brethren who were to fare at all
adventure, and they stood before the old man saying nought.  Then he
laughed and said: "O ho, my sons!  Here in Upmeads have ye all ye need
without money, but when ye fare in the outlands ye need money; is it
not a lack of yours that your pouches be bare?  Abide, for I have seen
to it."

Therewith he drew out of his pouch three little bags, and said; "Take
ye each one of these; for therein is all that my treasury may shed as
now.  In each of these is there coined money, both white and red, and
some deal of gold uncoined, and of rings and brooches a few, and by
estimation there is in each bag the same value reckoned in lawful
silver of Upmeads and the Wolds and the Overhill-Countries. Take up
each what there is, and do the best ye may therewith."

Then each took his bag, and kissed and embraced his father; and they
kissed Ralph and each other, and so got to horse and departed with
their squires, going softly because of the hot sun.  But Nicholas
slowly mounted his hackney and led Ralph's war-horse with him home
again to King Peter's House.



CHAPTER 2

Ralph Goeth Back Home to the High House


Ralph and King Peter walked slowly home together, and as they went King
Peter fell to telling of how in his young days he rode in the Wood
Debateable, and was belated there all alone, and happed upon men who
were outlaws and wolfheads, and feared for his life; but they treated
him kindly, and honoured him, and saw him safe on his way in the
morning.  So that never thereafter would he be art and part with those
who hunted outlaws to slay them.  "For," said he, "it is with these men
as with others, that they make prey of folk; yet these for the more
part prey on the rich, and the lawful prey on the poor.  Otherwise it
is with these wolfheads as with lords and knights and franklins, that
as there be bad amongst them, so also there be good; and the good ones
I happed on, and so may another man."

Hereto paid Ralph little heed at that time, since he had heard the tale
and its morality before, and that more than once; and moreover his mind
was set upon his own matters and these was he pondering.  Albeit
perchance the words abode with him.  So came they to the House, and
Ralph's mother, who was a noble dame, and well-liking as for her years,
which were but little over fifty, stood in the hall-door to see which
of her sons should come back to her, and when she saw them coming
together, she went up to them, and cast her arms about Ralph and kissed
him and caressed him--being exceeding glad that it was he and not one
of the others who had returned to dwell with them; for he was her
best-beloved, as was little marvel, seeing that he was by far the
fairest and the most loving.  But Ralph's face grew troubled again in
his mother's arms, for he loved her exceeding well; and forsooth he
loved the whole house and all that dwelt there, down to the turnspit
dogs in the chimney ingle, and the swallows that nested in the earthen
bottles, which when he was little he had seen his mother put up in the
eaves of the out-bowers: but now, love or no love, the spur was in his
side, and he must needs hasten as fate would have him.  However, when
he had disentangled himself from his mother's caresses, he enforced
himself to keep a cheerful countenance, and upheld it the whole evening
through, and was by seeming merry at supper, and went to bed singing.



CHAPTER 3

Ralph Cometh to the Cheaping-Town


He slept in an upper chamber in a turret of the House, which chamber
was his own, and none might meddle with it.  There the next day he
awoke in the dawning, and arose and clad himself, and took his wargear
and his sword and spear, and bore all away without doors to the side of
the Ford in that ingle of the river, and laid it for a while in a
little willow copse, so that no chance-comer might see it; then he went
back to the stable of the House and took his destrier from the stall
(it was a dapple-grey horse called Falcon, and was right good,) and
brought him down to the said willow copse, and tied him to a tree till
he had armed himself amongst the willows, whence he came forth
presently as brisk-looking and likely a man-at-arms as you might see on
a summer day.  Then he clomb up into the saddle, and went his ways
splashing across the ford, before the sun had arisen, while the
throstle-cocks were yet amidst their first song.

Then he rode on a little trot south away; and by then the sun was up he
was without the bounds of Upmeads; albeit in the land thereabout dwelt
none who were not friends to King Peter and his sons: and that was
well, for now were folk stirring and were abroad in the fields; as a
band of carles going with their scythes to the hay-field; or a maiden
with her milking-pails going to her kine, barefoot through the seeding
grass; or a company of noisy little lads on their way to the nearest
pool of the stream that they might bathe in the warm morning after the
warm night.  All these and more knew him and his armour and Falcon his
horse, and gave him the sele of the day, and he was nowise troubled at
meeting them; for besides that they thought it no wonder to meet one of
the lords of Upmeads going armed about his errands, their own errands
were close at home, and it was little likely that they should go that
day so far as to Upmeads Water, seeing that it ran through the meadows
a half-score miles to the north-ward.

So Ralph rode on, and came into the high road, that led one way back
again into Upmeads, and crossed the Water by a fair bridge late builded
between King Peter and a house of Canons on the north side, and the
other way into a good cheaping-town hight Wulstead, beyond which Ralph
knew little of the world which lay to the south, and seemed to him a
wondrous place, full of fair things and marvellous adventures.

So he rode till he came into the town when the fair morning was still
young, the first mass over, and maids gathered about the fountain
amidst the market-place, and two or three dames sitting under the
buttercross.  Ralph rode straight up to the house of a man whom he
knew, and had often given him guesting there, and he himself was not
seldom seen in the High House of Upmeads.  This man was a merchant, who
went and came betwixt men's houses, and bought and sold many things
needful and pleasant to folk, and King Peter dealt with him much and
often.  Now he stood in the door of his house, which was new and
goodly, sniffing the sweet scents which the morning wind bore into the
town; he was clad in a goodly long gown of grey welted with silver, of
thin cloth meet for the summer-tide: for little he wrought with his
hands, but much with his tongue; he was a man of forty summers,
ruddy-faced and black-bearded, and he was called Clement Chapman.

When he saw Ralph he smiled kindly on him, and came and held his
stirrup as he lighted down, and said:  "Welcome, lord!  Art thou come
to give me a message, and eat and drink in a poor huckster's house, and
thou armed so gallantly?"

Ralph laughed merrily, for he was hungry, and he said: "Yea, I will eat
and drink with thee and kiss my gossip, and go my ways."

Therewith the carle led him into the house; and if it were goodly
without, within it was better.  For there was a fair chamber panelled
with wainscot well carven, and a cupboard of no sorry vessels of silver
and latten: the chairs and stools as fair as might be; no king's might
be better: the windows were glazed, and there were flowers and knots
and posies in them; and the bed was hung with goodly web from over sea
such as the soldan useth.  Also, whereas the chapman's ware-bowers were
hard by the chamber, there was a pleasant mingled smell therefrom
floating about.  The table was set with meat and drink and vessel of
pewter and earth, all fair and good; and thereby stood the chapman's
wife, a very goodly woman of two-score years, who had held Ralph at the
font when she was a slim damsel new wedded; for she was come of no mean
kindred of the Kingdom of Upmeads: her name was Dame Katherine.

Now she kissed Ralph's cheek friendly, and said: "Welcome, gossip! thou
art here in good time to break thy fast; and we will give thee a trim
dinner thereafter, when thou hast been here and there in the town and
done thine errand; and then shalt thou drink a cup and sing me a song,
and so home again in the cool of the evening."

Ralph seemed a little troubled at her word, and he said: "Nay, gossip,
though I thank thee for all these good things as though I had them, yet
must I ride away south straightway after I have breakfasted, and said
one word to the goodman.  Goodman, how call ye the next town southward,
and how far is it thither?"

Quoth Clement:  "My son, what hast thou to do with riding south?  As
thou wottest, going hence south ye must presently ride the
hill-country; and that is no safe journey for a lonely man, even if he
be a doughty knight like to thee, lord."

Said Ralph, reddening withal:  "I have an errand that way."

"An errand of King Peter's or thine own?" said Clement.

"Of King Peter's, if ye must wot," said Ralph.

Clement were no chapman had he not seen that the lad was lying; so he
said:

"Fair lord, saving your worship, how would it be as to the speeding of
King Peter's errand, if I brought thee before our mayor, and swore the
peace against thee; so that I might keep thee in courteous prison till
I had sent to thy father of thy whereabouts?"

The young man turned red with anger; but ere he could speak Dame
Katherine said sharply:  "Hold thy peace, Clement!  What hast thou to
meddle or make in the matter?  If our young lord hath will to ride out
and see the world, why should we let him?  Yea, why should his father
let him, if it come to that?  Take my word for it that my gossip shall
go through the world and come back to those that love him, as goodly as
he went forth.  And hold! here is for a token thereof."

Therewith she went to an ark that stood in the corner, and groped in
the till thereof and brought out a little necklace of blue and green
stones with gold knobs betwixt, like a pair of beads; albeit neither
pope nor priest had blessed them; and tied to the necklace was a little
box of gold with something hidden therein.  This gaud she gave to
Ralph, and said to him: "Gossip, wear this about thy neck, and let no
man take it from thee, and I think it will be salvation to thee in
peril, and good luck to thee in the time of questing; so that it shall
be to thee as if thou hadst drunk of the WELL AT THE WORLD'S END."

"What is that water?" said Ralph, "and how may I find it?"

"I know not rightly," she said, "but if a body might come by it, I hear
say it saveth from weariness and wounding and sickness; and it winneth
love from all, and maybe life everlasting.  Hast thou not heard tell of
it, my husband?"

"Yea," said the chapman, "many times; and how that whoso hath drunk
thereof hath the tongue that none may withstand, whether in buying or
selling, or prevailing over the hearts of men in any wise.  But as for
its wherabouts, ye shall not find it in these parts.  Men say that it
is beyond the Dry Tree; and that is afar, God wot!  But now, lord
Ralph, I rede thee go back again this evening with Andrew, my nephew,
for company:  forsooth, he will do little less gainful than riding with
thee to Upmeads than if he abide in Wulstead; for he is idle.  But, my
lord, take it not amiss that I spake about the mayor and the tipstaves;
for it was but a jest, as thou mayest well wot."

Ralph's face cleared at that word, and he stood smiling, weighing the
chaplet in his hand; but Dame Katherine said:

"Dear gossip, do it on speedily; for it is a gift from me unto thee:
and from a gossip even king's sons may take a gift."

Quoth Ralph:  "But is it lawful to wear it? is there no wizardry within
it?"

"Hearken to him!" she said, "and how like unto a man he speaketh; if
there were a brawl in the street, he would strike in and ask no word
thereof, not even which were the better side: whereas here is my
falcon-chick frighted at a little gold box and a pair of Saracen beads."

"Well," quoth Ralph, "the first holy man I meet shall bless them for
me."

"That shall he not," said the dame, "that shall he not.  Who wotteth
what shall betide to thee or me if he do so?  Come, do them on, and
then to table!  For seest thou not that the goodman is wearying for
meat? and even thine eyes will shine the brighter for a mouthful,
king's son and gossip."

She took him by the hand and did the beads on his neck and kissed and
fondled him before he sat down, while the goodman looked on, grinning
rather sheepishly, but said nought to them; and only called on his boy
to lead the destrier to stable.  So when they were set down, the
chapman took up the word where it had been dropped, and said:  "So,
Lord Ralph, thou must needs take to adventures, being, as thou deemest,
full grown.  That is all one as the duck taketh to water despite of the
hen that hath hatched her.  Well, it was not to be thought that Upmeads
would hold you lords much longer.  Or what is gone with my lords your
brethren?"

Said Ralph:  "They have departed at all adventure, north, east, and
west, each bearing our father's blessing and a bag of pennies.  And to
speak the truth, goodman, for I perceive I am no doctor at lying, my
father and mother would have me stay at home when my brethren were
gone, and that liketh me not; therefore am I come out to seek my luck
in the world: for Upmeads is good for a star-gazer, maybe, or a
simpler, or a priest, or a worthy good carle of the fields, but not for
a king's son with the blood running hot in his veins.  Or what sayest
thou, gossip?"

Quoth the dame:  "I could weep for thy mother; but for thee nought at
all.  It is good that thou shouldest do thy will in the season of youth
and the days of thy pleasure.  Yea, and I deem that thou shalt come
back again great and worshipful; and I am called somewhat foreseeing.
Only look to it that thou keep the pretty thing that I have just given
thee."

"Well," said the chapman, "this is fine talk about pleasure and the
doing of one's will; nevertheless a whole skin is good wares, though it
be not to be cheapened in any market of the world.  Now, lord, go thou
where thou wilt, whether I say go or abide; and forsooth I am no man of
King Peter's, that I should stay thee.  As for the name of the next
town, it is called Higham-on-the-Way, and is a big town plenteous of
victuals, with strong walls and a castle, and a very rich abbey of
monks:  and there is peace within its walls, because the father abbot
wages a many men to guard him and his, and to uphold his rights against
all comers; wherein he doth wisely, and also well.  For much folk
flocketh to his town and live well therein; and there is great recourse
of chapmen thither.  No better market is there betwixt this and
Babylon.  Well, Sir Ralph, I rede thee if thou comest unhurt to
Higham-on-the-Way, go no further for this time, but take service with
the lord abbot, and be one of his men of war; thou may'st then become
his captain if thou shouldest live; which would be no bad adventure for
one who cometh from Upmeads."

Ralph looked no brighter for this word, and he answered nought to it:
but said presently:

"And what is to be looked for beyond Higham if one goeth further?  Dost
thou know the land any further?"

The carle smiled:  "Yea forsooth, and down to the Wood Perilous, and
beyond it, and the lands beyond the Wood; and far away through them.  I
say not that I have been to the Dry Tree; but I have spoken to one who
hath heard of him who hath seen it; though he might not come by a
draught of the Well at the World's End."

Ralph's eyes flashed, and his cheeks reddened as he listened hereto;
but he spake quietly:

"Master Clement, how far dost thou make it to Higham-on-the-Way?"

"A matter of forty miles," said the Chapman; "because, as thou wottest,
if ye ride south from hence, ye shall presently bring your nose up
against the big downs, and must needs climb them at once; and when ye
are at the top of Bear Hill, and look south away ye shall see nought
but downs on downs with never a road to call a road, and never a
castle, or church, or homestead:  nought but some shepherd's hut; or at
the most the little house of a holy man with a little chapel thereby in
some swelly of the chalk, where the water hath trickled into a pool;
for otherwise the place is waterless." Therewith he took a long pull at
the tankard by his side, and went on:

"Higham is beyond all that, and out into the fertile plain; and a
little river hight Coldlake windeth about the meadows there; and it is
a fair land; though look you the wool of the downs is good, good, good!
I have foison of this year's fleeces with me.  Ye shall raise none such
in Upmeads."

Ralph sat silent a little, as if pondering, and then he started up and
said: "Good master Clement, we have eaten thy meat and thank thee for
that and other matters.  Wilt thou now be kinder, and bid thy boy bring
round Falcon our horse; for we have far to go, and must begone
straight-away."

"Yea, lord," said Clement, "even so will I do."  And he muttered under
his breath; "Thou talkest big, my lad, with thy 'we'; but thou art
pressed lest Nicholas be here presently to fetch thee back; and to say
sooth I would his hand were on thy shoulder even now."

Then he spake aloud again, and said:

"I must now begone to my lads, and I will send one round with thy
war-horse. But take my rede, my lord, and become the man of the Abbot
of St. Mary's of Higham, and all will be well."

Therewith he edged himself out of the chamber, and the dame fell to
making a mighty clatter with the vessel and trenchers and cups on the
board, while Ralph walked up and down the chamber his war-gear jingling
upon him.  Presently the dame left her table-clatter and came up to
Ralph and looked kindly into his face and said:  "Gossip, hast thou
perchance any money?"

He flushed up red, and then his face fell; yet he spake gaily: "Yea,
gossip, I have both white and red:  there are three golden crowns in my
pouch, and a little flock of silver pennies: forsooth I say not as many
as would reach from here to Upmeads, if they were laid one after the
other."

She smiled and patted his cheek, and said:

"Thou art no very prudent child, king's son.  But it comes into my mind
that my master did not mean thee to go away empty-handed; else had he
not departed and left us twain together."

Therewith she went to the credence that stood in a corner, and opened a
drawer therein and took out a little bag, and gave it into Ralph's
hand, and said:  "This is the gift of the gossip; and thou mayst take
it without shame; all the more because if thy father had been a worser
man, and a harder lord he would have had more to give thee.  But now
thou hast as much or more as any one of thy brethren."

He took the bag smiling and shame-faced, but she looked on him fondly
and said:

"Now I know not whether I shall lay old Nicholas on thine heels when he
cometh after thee, as come he will full surely; or whether I shall
suffer the old sleuth-hound nose out thy slot of himself, as full
surely he will set on to it."

"Thou mightest tell him," said Ralph, "that I am gone to take service
with the Abbot of St. Mary's of Higham:  hah?"

She laughed and said:  "Wilt thou do so, lord, and follow the rede of
that goodman of mine, who thinketh himself as wise as Solomon?"

Ralph smiled and answered her nothing.

"Well," she said, "I shall say what likes me when the hour is at hand.
Lo, here! thine horse.  Abide yet a moment of time, and then go whither
thou needs must, like the wind of the summer day."

Therewith she went out of the chamber and came back again with a scrip
which she gave to Ralph and said:  "Herein is a flask of drink for the
waterless country, and a little meat for the way.  Fare thee well,
gossip!  Little did I look for it when I rose up this morning and
nothing irked me save the dulness of our town, and the littleness of
men's doings therein, that I should have to cut off a piece of my life
from me this morning, and say, farewell gossip, as now again I do."

Therewith she kissed him on either cheek and embraced him; and it might
be said of her and him that she let him go thereafter; for though as
aforesaid he loved her, and praised her kindness, he scarce understood
the eagerness of her love for him; whereas moreover she saw him not so
often betwixt Upmeads and Wulstead:  and belike she herself scarce
understood it.  Albeit she was a childless woman.

So when he had got to horse, she watched him riding a moment, and saw
how he waved his hand to her as he turned the corner of the
market-place, and how a knot of lads and lasses stood staring on him
after she lost sight of him.  Then she turned her back into the chamber
and laid her head on the table and wept.  Then came in the goodman
quietly and stood by her and she heeded him not.  He stood grinning
curiously on her awhile, and then laid his hand on her shoulder, and
said as she raised her face to him:

"Sweetheart, it availeth nought; when thou wert young and exceeding
fair, he was but a little babe, and thou wert looking in those days to
have babes of thine own; and then it was too soon: and now that he is
such a beauteous young man, and a king's son withal, and thou art
wedded to a careful carle of no weak heart, and thou thyself art more
than two-score years old, it is too late.  Yet thou didst well to give
our lord the money.  Lo! here is wherewithal to fill up the lack in thy
chest; and here is a toy for thee in place of the pair of beads thou
gavest him; and I bid thee look on it as if I had given him my share of
the money and the beads."

She turned to Clement, and took the bag of money, and the chaplet which
he held out to her, and she said: "God wot thou art no ill man, my
husband, but would God I had a son like to him!"

She still wept somewhat; but the chapman said:  "Let it rest there,
sweetheart! let it rest there!  It may be a year or twain before thou
seest him again:  and then belike he shall be come back with some woman
whom he loves better than any other; and who knows but in a way he may
deem himself our son.  Meanwhile thou hast done well, sweetheart, so be
glad."

Therewith he kissed her and went his ways to his merchandize, and she
to the ordering of her house, grieved but not unhappy.



CHAPTER 4

Ralph Rideth the Downs


As for Ralph, he rode on with a merry heart, and presently came to an
end of the plain country, and the great downs rose up before him with a
white road winding up to the top of them.  Just before the slopes began
to rise was a little thorp beside a stream, and thereby a fair church
and a little house of Canons: so Ralph rode toward the church to see if
therein were an altar of St. Nicholas, who was his good lord and
patron, that he might ask of him a blessing on his journey.  But as he
came up to the churchyard-gate he saw a great black horse tied thereto
as if abiding some one; and as he lighted down from his saddle he saw a
man coming hastily from out the church-door and striding swiftly toward
the said gate.  He was a big man, and armed; for he had a bright steel
sallet on his head, which covered his face all save the end of his
chin; and plates he had on his legs and arms.  He wore a green coat
over his armour, and thereon was wrought in gold an image of a tree
leafless:  he had a little steel axe about his neck, and a great sword
hung by his side.  Ralph stood looking on him with his hand on the
latch of the gate, but when the man came thereto he tore it open
roughly and shoved through at once, driving Ralph back, so that he
well-nigh overset him, and so sprang to his horse and swung himself
into the saddle, just as Ralph steadied himself and ruffled up to him,
half drawing his sword from the scabbard the while.  But the
man-at-arms cried out, "Put it back, put it back!  If thou must needs
deal with every man that shoveth thee in his haste, thy life is like to
be but short."

He was settling himself in his saddle as he spoke, and now he shook his
rein, and rode off speedily toward the hill-road.  But when he was so
far off that Ralph might but see his face but as a piece of reddish
colour, he reined up for a moment of time, and turning round in his
saddle lifted up his sallet and left his face bare, and cried out as if
to Ralph, "The first time!" And then let the head-piece fall again, and
set spurs to his horse and gallopped away.

Ralph stood looking at him as he got smaller on the long white road,
and wondering what this might mean, and how the unknown man should know
him, if he did know him.  But presently he let his wonder run off him,
and went his ways into the church, wherein he found his good lord and
friend St. Nicholas, and so said a paternoster before his altar, and
besought his help, and made his offering; and then departed and gat to
horse again, and rode softly the way to the downs, for the day was hot.

The way was steep and winding, with a hollow cup of the hills below it,
and above it a bent so steep that Ralph could see but a few yards of it
on his left hand; but when he came to the hill's brow and could look
down on the said bent, he saw strange figures on the face thereof, done
by cutting away the turf so that the chalk might show clear.  A tree
with leaves was done on that hill-side, and on either hand of it a
beast like a bear ramping up against the tree; and these signs were
very ancient.  This hill-side carving could not be seen from the thorp
beneath, which was called Netherton, because the bent looked westward
down into the hollow of the hill abovesaid; but from nigher to Wulstead
they were clear to see, and Ralph had often beheld them, but never so
nigh: and that hill was called after them Bear Hill.  At the top of it
was an earth-work of the ancient folk, which also was called Bear
Castle.  And now Ralph rode over the hill's brow into it; for the walls
had been beaten down in places long and long ago.

Now he rode up the wall, and at the topmost of it turned and looked
aback on the blue country which he had ridden through stretching many a
league below, and tried if he could pick out Upmeads from amongst the
diverse wealth of the summer land: but Upmeads Water was hidden, and he
could see nothing to be sure of to tell him whereabouts the High House
stood; yet he deemed that he could make out the Debateable Wood and the
hills behind it well enough.  Then he turned his horse about, and had
the down-country before him; long lines of hills to wit, one rising
behind the other like the waves of a somewhat quiet sea: no trees
thereon, nor houses that he might see thence: nought but a green road
that went waving up and down before him greener than the main face of
the slopes.

He looked at it all for a minute or two as the south-west wind went
past his ears, and played a strange tune on the innumerable stems of
the bents and the hard-stalked blossoms, to which the bees sang
counterpoint.  Then the heart arose within him, and he drew the sword
from the scabbard, and waved it about his head, and shook it toward the
south, and cried out, "Now, welcome world, and be thou blessed from one
end to the other, from the ocean sea to the uttermost mountains!"

A while he held the white steel in his fist, and then sheathed the
blade, and rode down soberly over the turf bridge across the ancient
fosse, and so came on to the green road made many ages before by an
ancient people, and so trotted south along fair and softly.

Little is to be told of his journey through the downs: as he topped a
low hill whereon were seven grave-mounds of the ancient folk in a row,
he came on a shepherd lying amidst of his sheep: the man sprang to his
feet when he heard horse-hoofs anigh him and saw the glint of steel,
and he set his hand to a short spear which lay by him; but when he saw
nought but Ralph, and heard how he gave him the sele of the day, he
nodded his head in a friendly way, though he said nought in salutation;
for the loneliness of the downs made the speech slow within him.

Again some two miles further on Ralph met a flock of sheep coming down
a bent which the road climbed, and with them were three men, their
drovers, and they drew nigh him as he was amidst of the sheep, so that
he could scarce see the way.  Each of these three had a weapon; one a
pole-axe, another a long spear, and the third a flail jointed and bound
with iron, and an anlace hanging at his girdle.  So they stood in the
way and hailed him when the sheep were gone past; and the man with the
spear asked him whither away.  "I am turned toward Higham-on-the-Way,"
quoth he; "and how many miles shall I ride ere I get there?"

Said one of them:  "Little less than twenty, lord."  Now it was past
noon two hours, and the day was hot; so whereas the faces of the men
looked kind and friendly, albeit somewhat rugged, he lighted down from
his horse and sat down by the way-side, and drew his bottle of good
wine from out of his wallet, and asked the men if they were in haste.
"Nay, master," said he of the pole-axe, while all eyes turned to the
bottle, "HE has gone by too long; and will neither meddle with us, nor
may we deal with him."

"Well then," quoth Ralph, "there is time for bever.  Have ye ought of a
cup, that we may drink to each other?"

"Yea," said the carle with the anlace, "that have I." Therewith he drew
from his pouch a ram's horn rimmed with silver, and held it up, and
said as if he were speaking to it:  "Now, Thirly, rejoice! for ye shall
have lord's wine poured into thy maw."

Therewith he held it out toward Ralph, who laughed and filled it up,
and filled for himself a little silver cup which he carried, and said:
"To you, shepherds!  Much wool and little cry!" And he drank withal.

"And I," quoth the man with the horn, "call this health; Much cry and
little wool!"

"Well, well, how mean ye by that, Greasy Wat?" said the man with the
spear, taking the horn as he spake; "that is but a poor wish for a lord
that drinketh out of our cup."

Said Wat:  "Why, neighbour, why! thy wit is none too hasty.  The wool
that a knight sheareth is war and battle; that is wounding and death;
but the cry is the talk and boasting and minstrelsy that goeth before
all this.  Which is the best wish to wish him? the wounds and the
death, or the fore-rumour and stir thereof which hurteth no man?"

Ralph laughed thereat, and was merry and blithe with them; but the
spearman, who was an old man, said:

"For all Wat sayeth, lord, and his japes, ye must not misdeem of us
that we shepherds of the Downs can do nought but run to ales and
feasts, and that we are but pot-valiant: maybe thou thyself mayst live
to see things go otherwise:  and in that day may we have such as thee
for captain.  Now, fair lord, I drink to thy crown of valour, and thy
good luck; and we thank thee for the wine and yet more for the blithe
fellowship."

So Ralph filled up the ram's horn till Dame Katherine's good island
wine was well-nigh spent; and at last he said:

"Now, my masters, I must to horse; but I pray you tell or we depart,
what did ye mean when ye said that HE had gone past?  Who is HE?"

The merry faces of the men changed at his word, and they looked in each
other's faces, till at last the old spearman answered him:

"Fair lord, these things we have little will to talk about: for we be
poor men with no master to fleece us, and no lord to help us: also we
be folk unlearned and unlettered, and from our way of life, whereas we
dwell in the wilderness, we seldom come within the doors of a church.
But whereas we have drunk with thee, who seemest to be a man of
lineage, and thou hast been blithe with us, we will tell thee that we
have seen one riding south along the Greenway, clad in a coat as green
as the way, with the leafless tree done on his breast.  So nigh to him
we were that we heard his cry as he sped along, as ye may hear the
lapwing whining; for he said: 'POINT AND EDGE, POINT AND EDGE!  THE RED
WATER AMIDST OF THE HILLS!' In my lifetime such a man hath, to my
knowledge, been seen thrice before; and after each sight of him
followed evil days and the death of men.  Moreover this is the Eve of
St. John, and we deem the token the worse therefor.  Or how deemest
thou?"

Ralph stood silent awhile; for he was thinking of the big man whom he
had met at the churchyard gate, and all this tale seemed wonderful to
him.  But at last he said:

"I cannot tell what there is in it; herein am I no help to you.  To-day
I am but little; though I may one day be great.  Yet this may I do for
you; tomorrow will I let sing a mass in St. Mary's Church on your
behoof.  And hereafter, if I wax as my will is, and I come to be lord
in these lands, I will look to it to do what a good lord should do for
the shepherds of the Downs, so that they may live well, and die in good
hope.  So may the Mother of God help me at need!"

Said the old shepherd:  "Thou hast sworn an oath, and it is a good
oath, and well sworn.  Now if thou dost as thou swearest, words can but
little thanks, yet deeds may.  Wherefore if ever thou comest back
hither, and art in such need that a throng of men may help thee
therein; then let light a great fire upon each corner of the topmost
wall of Bear Castle, and call to mind this watch-word: 'SMITE ASIDE THE
AXE, O BEAR-FATHER,' and then shalt thou see what shall betide thee for
thy good-hap: farewell now, with the saints to aid!"

Ralph bade them live well and hail, and mounted his horse and rode off
down the Greenway, and as he rode the shepherds waved their weapons to
him in token of good-will.



CHAPTER 5

Ralph Cometh to Higham-on-the-Way


Nought more befell Ralph to tell of till he came to the end of the
Downs and saw Higham lying below him overlooked by a white castle on a
knoll, and with a river lapping it about and winding on through its
fair green meadows even as Clement had told.  From amidst its houses
rose up three towers of churches above their leaden roofs, and high
above all, long and great, the Abbey Church; and now was the low sun
glittering on its gilded vanes and the wings of the angels high upon
the battlements.

So Ralph rode down the slopes and was brisk about it, for it was
drawing toward sunset, and he knew not at what hour they shut their
gates.  The road was steep and winding, and it was the more part of an
hour ere he came to the gate, which was open, and like to be yet, for
many folk were thronging in, which throng also had hindered him soon
after he came into the plain country.  The gate was fair and strong,
but Ralph saw no men-at-arms about it that evening.  He rode into the
street unquestioned, and therein was the throng great of people clad in
fair and gay attire; and presently Ralph called to mind that this was
St. John's Eve, so that he knew that there was some feast toward.

At last the throng was so thick that he was stayed by it; and
therewithal a religious who was beside him and thrust up against his
horse, turned to him and gave him good even, and said:  "By thy weapons
and gear thou art a stranger here in our burg, Sir Knight?"

"So it is," said Ralph.

"And whither away?" said the monk; "hast thou some kinsman or friend in
the town?"

"Nay," said Ralph, "I seek a good hostelry where I may abide the night
for my money."

The monk shook his head and said:  "See ye the folk?  It is holiday
time, and midsummer after haysel.  Ye shall scarce get lodging outside
our house.  But what then?  Come thou thither straightway and have
harbour of the best, and see our prior, who loveth young and brisk
men-at-arms like to thee.  Lo now! the throng openeth a little; I will
walk by thy bridle and lead thee the shortest road thither."

Ralph gainsaid him not, and they bored through the throng of the street
till they came into the market-square, which was very great and clean,
paved with stones all over:  tall and fair houses rose up on three
sides of it, and on the fourth was the Great Church which made those
houses seem but low: most of it was new-built; for the lord Abbot that
then was, though he had not begun it, had taken the work up from his
forerunner and had pushed it forward all he might; for he was very
rich, and an open-handed man.  Like dark gold it showed under the
evening sun, and the painted and gilded imagery shone like jewels upon
it.

"Yea," said the monk, as he noted Ralph's wonder at this wonder; "a
most goodly house it is, and happy shall they be that dwell there."

Therewith he led Ralph on, turning aside through the great square.
Ralph saw that there were many folk therein, though it was too big to
be thronged thick with them.  Amidst of it was now a great pile of wood
hung about with flowers, and hard by it a stage built up with hangings
of rich cloth on one side thereof.  He asked the monk what this might
mean, and he told him the wood was for the Midsummer bale-fire, and the
stage for the show that should come thereafter.  So the brother led
Ralph down a lane to the south of the great west door, and along the
side of the minster and so came to the Abbey gate, and there was Ralph
well greeted, and had all things given him which were due to a good
knight; and then was he brought into the Guest-hall, a very fair
chamber, which was now full of men of all degrees.  He was shown to a
seat on the dais within two of the subprior's, and beside him sat an
honourable lord, a vassal of St. Mary's. So was supper served well and
abundantly:  the meat and drink was of the best, and the vessel and all
the plenishing was as good as might be; and the walls of that chamber
were hung with noble arras-cloth picturing the Pilgrimage of the Soul
of Man.

Every man there who spoke with Ralph, and they were many, was exceeding
courteous to him; and he heard much talk about him of the wealth of the
lands of St. Mary's at Higham, and how it was flourishing; and of the
Abbot how mighty he was, so that he might do what he would, and that
his will was to help and to give, and be blithe with all men: and folk
told of turmoil and war in other lands, and praised the peace of
Higham-on-the-Way.

Ralph listened to all this, and smiled, and said to himself that to
another man this might well be the end of his journey for that time;
but for him all this peace and well-being was not enough; for though it
were a richer land than Upmeads, yet to the peace and the quiet he was
well used, and he had come forth not for the winning of fatter peace,
but to try what new thing his youth and his might and his high hope and
his good hap might accomplish.

So when the supper was over, and the wine and spices had been brought,
the Guest-hall began to thin somewhat, and the brother who had brought
Ralph thither came to him and said:

"Fair lord, it were nowise ill if ye went forth, as others of our
guests have done, to see the deeds of Midsummer Eve that shall be done
in the great square in honour of Holy John; for our manner therein at
Higham has been much thought of.  Look my son!"

He pointed to the windows of the hall therewith, and lo! they grew
yellow and bright with some fire without, as if a new fiery day had
been born out of the dusk of the summer night; for the light that shone
through the windows out-did the candle-light in the hall.  Ralph
started thereat and laid his right hand to the place of his sword,
which indeed he had left with the chamberlain; but the monk laughed and
said:  "Fear nothing, lord; there is no foeman in Higham: come now,
lest thou be belated of the show."

So he led Ralph forth, and into the square, where there was a space
appointed for the brethren and their guests to see the plays; and the
square was now so full of folk that it seemed like as if that there
were no one man in the streets which were erewhile so thronged.

There were rows of men-at-arms in bright armour also to keep the folk
in their places, like as hurdles pen the sheep up; howbeit they were
nowise rough with folk, but humble and courteous.  Many and many were
the torches and cressets burning steadily in the calm air, so that, as
aforesaid, night was turned into day.  But on the scaffold aforesaid
were standing bright and gay figures, whose names or what they were
Ralph had no time to ask.

Now the bells began to clash from the great tower of the minster, and
in a little while they had clashed themselves into order and rang clear
and tuneably for a space; and while they were ringing, lo! those
gay-clad people departed from the scaffold, and a canvas painted like a
mountain-side, rocky and with caves therein, was drawn up at the back
of it.  Then came thereon one clad like a king holding a fair maiden by
the hand, and with him was a dame richly clad and with a crown on her
head.  So these two kissed the maiden, and lamented over her, and went
their ways, and the maiden left alone sat down upon a rock and covered
up her face and wept; and while Ralph wondered what this might mean, or
what grieved the maiden, there came creeping, as it were from out of a
cranny of the rocks, a worm huge-headed and covered over with scales
that glittered in the torch-light. Then Ralph sprang up in his place,
for he feared for the maiden that the worm would devour her:  but the
monk who sat by him pulled him down by the skirt, and laughed and said:
"Sit still, lord! for the champion also has been provided."

Then Ralph sat down again somewhat abashed and looked on; yet was his
heart in his mouth the while.  And so while the maiden stood as one
astonied before the worm, who gaped upon her with wide open mouth,
there came forth from a cleft in the rocks a goodly knight who bore
silver, a red cross; and he had his sword in his hand, and he fell upon
the worm to smite him; and the worm ramped up against him, and there
was battle betwixt them, while the maiden knelt anigh with her hands
clasped together.

Then Ralph knew that this was a play of the fight of St. George with
the worm; so he sat silent till the champion had smitten off the worm's
head and had come to the maiden and kissed and embraced her, and shown
her the grisly head.  Then presently came many folk on to the scaffold,
to wit, the king and queen who were the father and mother of the
maiden, and a bishop clad in very fair vestments, and knights withal;
and they stood about St. George and the maiden, and with them were
minstrels who fell to playing upon harps and fiddles; while other some
fell to singing a sweet song in honour of St. George, and the maiden
delivered.

So when it was all done, the monk said:  "This play is set forth by the
men-at-arms of our lord Abbot, who have great devotion toward St.
George, and he is their friend and their good lord.  But hereafter will
be other plays, of wild men and their feasting in the woods in the
Golden Age of the world; and that is done by the scribes and the
limners.  And after that will be a pageant of St. Agnes ordered by the
clothiers and the webbers, which be both many and deft in this good
town.  Albeit thou art a young man and hast ridden far to-day belike,
and mayhappen thou wilt not be able to endure it: so it may be well to
bring thee out of this throng straightway.  Moreover I have bethought
me, that there is much of what is presently to come which we shall see
better from the minster roof, or even it may be from the tower:  wilt
thou come then?"

Ralph had liefer have sat there and seen all the plays to the end, for
they seemed to him exceeding fair, and like to ravish the soul from the
body; howbeit, being shamefaced, he knew not how to gainsay the
brother, who took him by the hand, and led him through the press to the
west front of the minster, where on the north side was a little door in
a nook.  So they went up a stair therein a good way till they came into
a gallery over the western door; and looking forth thence Ralph deemed
that he could have seen a long way had daylight been, for it was higher
than the tops of the highest houses.

So there they abode a space looking