The Project Gutenberg eBook of Charlotte Temple
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Charlotte Temple

Author: Mrs. Rowson


        
Release date: March 12, 2006 [eBook #171]
                Most recently updated: March 16, 2018

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/171

Credits: Produced by Judith Boss and David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHARLOTTE TEMPLE ***




Produced by Judith Boss and David Widger





CHARLOTTE TEMPLE

By Susanna Haswell Rowson



Contents:

CHAPTER I. A Boarding School.

CHAPTER II. Domestic Concerns.

CHAPTER III. Unexpected Misfortunes.

CHAPTER IV. Change of Fortune.

CHAPTER V. Such Things Are.

CHAPTER VI. An Intriguing Teacher.

CHAPTER VII. Natural Sense of Propriety Inherent in the Female Bosom.

CHAPTER VIII. Domestic Pleasures Planned.

CHAPTER IX. We Know Not What a Day May Bring Forth.

CHAPTER X. When We Have Excited Curiosity, It Is But an Act of
Good Nature to Gratify it.

CHAPTER XI. Conflict of Love and Duty.

CHAPTER XII. Nature's last, best gift: Creature in whom excell'd,
whatever could To sight or thought be nam'd! Holy, divine! good,
amiable, and sweet! How thou art falln'!--

CHAPTER XIII. Cruel Disappointment.

CHAPTER XIV. Maternal Sorrow.

CHAPTER XV. Embarkation.

CHAPTER XVI. Necessary Digression.

CHAPTER XVII. A Wedding.


VOLUME II.

CHAPTER XVIII. Reflections.

CHAPTER XIX. A Mistake Discovered.

CHAPTER XX. Virtue never appears so amiable as when reaching forth her
hand to raise a fallen sister. Chapter of Accidents.

CHAPTER XXI. Teach me to feel another's woe, To hide the fault I see,
That mercy I to others show That mercy show to me. POPE.

CHAPTER XXII. Sorrows of the Heart.

CHAPTER XXIII. A Man May Smile, and Smile, and Be a Villain.

CHAPTER XXIV. Mystery Developed.

CHAPTER XXV. Reception of a Letter.

CHAPTER XXVI. What Might Be Expected.

CHAPTER XXVII. Pensive she mourn'd, and hung her languid head, Like a
fair lily overcharg'd with dew.

CHAPTER XXVIII. A Trifling Retrospect.

CHAPTER XXIX. We Go Forward Again.

CHAPTER XXX. And what is friendship but a name, A charm that lulls to
sleep, A shade that follows wealth and fame, But leaves the wretch to
weep.

CHAPTER XXXI. Subject Continued.

CHAPTER XXXII. Reasons Why and Wherefore.

CHAPTER XXXIII. Which People Void of Feeling Need Not Read.

CHAPTER XXXIV. Retribution.

CHAPTER XXXV. Conclusion.





PREFACE.

FOR the perusal of the young and thoughtless of the fair sex, this Tale
of Truth is designed; and I could wish my fair readers to consider it as
not merely the effusion of Fancy, but as a reality. The circumstances
on which I have founded this novel were related to me some little time
since by an old lady who had personally known Charlotte, though she
concealed the real names of the characters, and likewise the place where
the unfortunate scenes were acted: yet as it was impossible to offer a
relation to the public in such an imperfect state, I have thrown over
the whole a slight veil of fiction, and substituted names and places
according to my own fancy. The principal characters in this little tale
are now consigned to the silent tomb: it can therefore hurt the feelings
of no one; and may, I flatter myself, be of service to some who are so
unfortunate as to have neither friends to advise, or understanding to
direct them, through the various and unexpected evils that attend a
young and unprotected woman in her first entrance into life.

While the tear of compassion still trembled in my eye for the fate of
the unhappy Charlotte, I may have children of my own, said I, to
whom this recital may be of use, and if to your own children, said
Benevolence, why not to the many daughters of Misfortune who, deprived
of natural friends, or spoilt by a mistaken education, are thrown on an
unfeeling world without the least power to defend themselves from the
snares not only of the other sex, but from the more dangerous arts of
the profligate of their own.

Sensible as I am that a novel writer, at a time when such a variety
of works are ushered into the world under that name, stands but a poor
chance for fame in the annals of literature, but conscious that I wrote
with a mind anxious for the happiness of that sex whose morals and
conduct have so powerful an influence on mankind in general; and
convinced that I have not wrote a line that conveys a wrong idea to
the head or a corrupt wish to the heart, I shall rest satisfied in the
purity of my own intentions, and if I merit not applause, I feel that I
dread not censure.

If the following tale should save one hapless fair one from the errors
which ruined poor Charlotte, or rescue from impending misery the heart
of one anxious parent, I shall feel a much higher gratification in
reflecting on this trifling performance, than could possibly result
from the applause which might attend the most elegant finished piece
of literature whose tendency might deprave the heart or mislead the
understanding.




CHARLOTTE TEMPLE,




VOLUME I



CHAPTER I.

A BOARDING SCHOOL.

“ARE you for a walk,” said Montraville to his companion, as they arose
from table; “are you for a walk? or shall we order the chaise and
proceed to Portsmouth?” Belcour preferred the former; and they sauntered
out to view the town, and to make remarks on the inhabitants, as they
returned from church.

Montraville was a Lieutenant in the army: Belcour was his brother
officer: they had been to take leave of their friends previous to their
departure for America, and were now returning to Portsmouth, where the
troops waited orders for embarkation. They had stopped at Chichester
to dine; and knowing they had sufficient time to reach the place of
destination before dark, and yet allow them a walk, had resolved, it
being Sunday afternoon, to take a survey of the Chichester ladies as
they returned from their devotions.

They had gratified their curiosity, and were preparing to return to the
inn without honouring any of the belles with particular notice, when
Madame Du Pont, at the head of her school, descended from the church.
Such an assemblage of youth and innocence naturally attracted the young
soldiers: they stopped; and, as the little cavalcade passed, almost
involuntarily pulled off their hats. A tall, elegant girl looked at
Montraville and blushed: he instantly recollected the features of
Charlotte Temple, whom he had once seen and danced with at a ball at
Portsmouth. At that time he thought on her only as a very lovely child,
she being then only thirteen; but the improvement two years had made in
her person, and the blush of recollection which suffused her cheeks as
she passed, awakened in his bosom new and pleasing ideas. Vanity led him
to think that pleasure at again beholding him might have occasioned the
emotion he had witnessed, and the same vanity led him to wish to see her
again.

“She is the sweetest girl in the world,” said he, as he entered the inn.
Belcour stared. “Did you not notice her?” continued Montraville: “she
had on a blue bonnet, and with a pair of lovely eyes of the same colour,
has contrived to make me feel devilish odd about the heart.”

“Pho,” said Belcour, “a musket ball from our friends, the Americans, may
in less than two months make you feel worse.”

“I never think of the future,” replied Montraville; “but am determined
to make the most of the present, and would willingly compound with any
kind Familiar who would inform me who the girl is, and how I might be
likely to obtain an interview.”

But no kind Familiar at that time appearing, and the chaise which they
had ordered, driving up to the door, Montraville and his companion were
obliged to take leave of Chichester and its fair inhabitant, and proceed
on their journey.

But Charlotte had made too great an impression on his mind to be easily
eradicated: having therefore spent three whole days in thinking on her
and in endeavouring to form some plan for seeing her, he determined
to set off for Chichester, and trust to chance either to favour or
frustrate his designs. Arriving at the verge of the town, he dismounted,
and sending the servant forward with the horses, proceeded toward the
place, where, in the midst of an extensive pleasure ground, stood the
mansion which contained the lovely Charlotte Temple. Montraville leaned
on a broken gate, and looked earnestly at the house. The wall which
surrounded it was high, and perhaps the Argus's who guarded the
Hesperian fruit within, were more watchful than those famed of old.

“'Tis a romantic attempt,” said he; “and should I even succeed in seeing
and conversing with her, it can be productive of no good: I must of
necessity leave England in a few days, and probably may never return;
why then should I endeavour to engage the affections of this lovely
girl, only to leave her a prey to a thousand inquietudes, of which at
present she has no idea? I will return to Portsmouth and think no more
about her.”

The evening now was closed; a serene stillness reigned; and the
chaste Queen of Night with her silver crescent faintly illuminated the
hemisphere. The mind of Montraville was hushed into composure by the
serenity of the surrounding objects. “I will think on her no more,” said
he, and turned with an intention to leave the place; but as he turned,
he saw the gate which led to the pleasure grounds open, and two women
come out, who walked arm-in-arm across the field.

“I will at least see who these are,” said he. He overtook them, and
giving them the compliments of the evening, begged leave to see them
into the more frequented parts of the town: but how was he delighted,
when, waiting for an answer, he discovered, under the concealment of a
large bonnet, the face of Charlotte Temple.

He soon found means to ingratiate himself with her companion, who was a
French teacher at the school, and, at parting, slipped a letter he had
purposely written, into Charlotte's hand, and five guineas into that of
Mademoiselle, who promised she would endeavour to bring her young charge
into the field again the next evening.




CHAPTER II.

DOMESTIC CONCERNS.

MR. Temple was the youngest son of a nobleman whose fortune was by no
means adequate to the antiquity, grandeur, and I may add, pride of the
family. He saw his elder brother made completely wretched by marrying a
disagreeable woman, whose fortune helped to prop the sinking dignity
of the house; and he beheld his sisters legally prostituted to old,
decrepid men, whose titles gave them consequence in the eyes of the
world, and whose affluence rendered them splendidly miserable. “I will
not sacrifice internal happiness for outward shew,” said he: “I will
seek Content; and, if I find her in a cottage, will embrace her with as
much cordiality as I should if seated on a throne.”

Mr. Temple possessed a small estate of about five hundred pounds a year;
and with that he resolved to preserve independence, to marry where the
feelings of his heart should direct him, and to confine his expenses
within the limits of his income. He had a heart open to every generous
feeling of humanity, and a hand ready to dispense to those who wanted
part of the blessings he enjoyed himself.

As he was universally known to be the friend of the unfortunate, his
advice and bounty was frequently solicited; nor was it seldom that he
sought out indigent merit, and raised it from obscurity, confining his
own expenses within a very narrow compass.

“You are a benevolent fellow,” said a young officer to him one day; “and
I have a great mind to give you a fine subject to exercise the goodness
of your heart upon.”

“You cannot oblige me more,” said Temple, “than to point out any way by
which I can be serviceable to my fellow creatures.”

“Come along then,” said the young man, “we will go and visit a man who
is not in so good a lodging as he deserves; and, were it not that he
has an angel with him, who comforts and supports him, he must long since
have sunk under his misfortunes.” The young man's heart was too full
to proceed; and Temple, unwilling to irritate his feelings by making
further enquiries, followed him in silence, til they arrived at the
Fleet prison.

The officer enquired for Captain Eldridge: a person led them up several
pair of dirty stairs, and pointing to a door which led to a miserable,
small apartment, said that was the Captain's room, and retired.

The officer, whose name was Blakeney, tapped at the door, and was bid to
enter by a voice melodiously soft. He opened the door, and discovered to
Temple a scene which rivetted him to the spot with astonishment.

The apartment, though small, and bearing strong marks of poverty, was
neat in the extreme. In an arm-chair, his head reclined upon his hand,
his eyes fixed on a book which lay open before him, sat an aged man in
a Lieutenant's uniform, which, though threadbare, would sooner call a
blush of shame into the face of those who could neglect real merit, than
cause the hectic of confusion to glow on the cheeks of him who wore it.

Beside him sat a lovely creature busied in painting a fan mount. She was
fair as the lily, but sorrow had nipped the rose in her cheek before it
was half blown. Her eyes were blue; and her hair, which was light brown,
was slightly confined under a plain muslin cap, tied round with a black
ribbon; a white linen gown and plain lawn handkerchief composed
the remainder of her dress; and in this simple attire, she was more
irresistibly charming to such a heart as Temple's, than she would have
been, if adorned with all the splendor of a courtly belle.

When they entered, the old man arose from his seat, and shaking Blakeney
by the hand with great cordiality, offered Temple his chair; and there
being but three in the room, seated himself on the side of his little
bed with evident composure.

“This is a strange place,” said he to Temple, “to receive visitors of
distinction in; but we must fit our feelings to our station. While I am
not ashamed to own the cause which brought me here, why should I blush
at my situation? Our misfortunes are not our faults; and were it not for
that poor girl--”

Here the philosopher was lost in the father. He rose hastily from his
seat, and walking toward the window, wiped off a tear which he was
afraid would tarnish the cheek of a sailor.

Temple cast his eye on Miss Eldridge: a pellucid drop had stolen from
her eyes, and fallen upon a rose she was painting. It blotted and
discoloured the flower. “'Tis emblematic,” said he mentally: “the rose
of youth and health soon fades when watered by the tear of affliction.”

“My friend Blakeney,” said he, addressing the old man, “told me I could
be of service to you: be so kind then, dear Sir, as to point out some
way in which I can relieve the anxiety of your heart and increase the
pleasures of my own.”

“My good young man,” said Eldridge, “you know not what you offer. While
deprived of my liberty I cannot be free from anxiety on my own account;
but that is a trifling concern; my anxious thoughts extend to one more
dear a thousand times than life: I am a poor weak old man, and must
expect in a few years to sink into silence and oblivion; but when I am
gone, who will protect that fair bud of innocence from the blasts of
adversity, or from the cruel hand of insult and dishonour.”

“Oh, my father!” cried Miss Eldridge, tenderly taking his hand, “be not
anxious on that account; for daily are my prayers offered to heaven that
our lives may terminate at the same instant, and one grave receive us
both; for why should I live when deprived of my only friend.”

Temple was moved even to tears. “You will both live many years,” said
he, “and I hope see much happiness. Cheerly, my friend, cheerly; these
passing clouds of adversity will serve only to make the sunshine of
prosperity more pleasing. But we are losing time: you might ere this
have told me who were your creditors, what were their demands, and other
particulars necessary to your liberation.”

“My story is short,” said Mr. Eldridge, “but there are some particulars
which will wring my heart barely to remember; yet to one whose offers
of friendship appear so open and disinterested, I will relate every
circumstance that led to my present, painful situation. But my child,”
 continued he, addressing his daughter, “let me prevail on you to take
this opportunity, while my friends are with me, to enjoy the benefit of
air and exercise.”

“Go, my love; leave me now; to-morrow at your usual hour I will expect
you.”

Miss Eldridge impressed on his cheek the kiss of filial affection, and
obeyed.




CHAPTER III.

UNEXPECTED MISFORTUNES.

“MY life,” said Mr. Eldridge, “till within these few years was marked by
no particular circumstance deserving notice. I early embraced the life
of a sailor, and have served my King with unremitted ardour for many
years. At the age of twenty-five I married an amiable woman; one son,
and the girl who just now left us, were the fruits of our union. My
boy had genius and spirit. I straitened my little income to give him a
liberal education, but the rapid progress he made in his studies amply
compensated for the inconvenience. At the academy where he received his
education he commenced an acquaintance with a Mr. Lewis, a young man
of affluent fortune: as they grew up their intimacy ripened into
friendship, and they became almost inseparable companions.

“George chose the profession of a soldier. I had neither friends or
money to procure him a commission, and had wished him to embrace a
nautical life: but this was repugnant to his wishes, and I ceased to
urge him on the subject.

“The friendship subsisting between Lewis and my son was of such a nature
as gave him free access to our family; and so specious was his manner
that we hesitated not to state to him all our little difficulties in
regard to George's future views. He listened to us with attention, and
offered to advance any sum necessary for his first setting out.

“I embraced the offer, and gave him my note for the payment of it, but
he would not suffer me to mention any stipulated time, as he said I
might do it whenever most convenient to myself. About this time my dear
Lucy returned from school, and I soon began to imagine Lewis looked at
her with eyes of affection. I gave my child a caution to beware of him,
and to look on her mother as her friend. She was unaffectedly artless;
and when, as I suspected, Lewis made professions of love, she confided
in her parents, and assured us her heart was perfectly unbiassed in his
favour, and she would cheerfully submit to our direction.

“I took an early opportunity of questioning him concerning his
intentions towards my child: he gave an equivocal answer, and I forbade
him the house.

“The next day he sent and demanded payment of his money. It was not in
my power to comply with the demand. I requested three days to endeavour
to raise it, determining in that time to mortgage my half pay, and live
on a small annuity which my wife possessed, rather than be under an
obligation to so worthless a man: but this short time was not allowed
me; for that evening, as I was sitting down to supper, unsuspicious of
danger, an officer entered, and tore me from the embraces of my family.

“My wife had been for some time in a declining state of health: ruin at
once so unexpected and inevitable was a stroke she was not prepared to
bear, and I saw her faint into the arms of our servant, as I left my
own habitation for the comfortless walls of a prison. My poor Lucy,
distracted with her fears for us both, sunk on the floor and endeavoured
to detain me by her feeble efforts, but in vain; they forced open her
arms; she shrieked, and fell prostrate. But pardon me. The horrors of
that night unman me. I cannot proceed.”

He rose from his seat, and walked several times across the room: at
length, attaining more composure, he cried--“What a mere infant I am!
Why, Sir, I never felt thus in the day of battle.” “No,” said Temple;
“but the truly brave soul is tremblingly alive to the feelings of
humanity.”

“True,” replied the old man, (something like satisfaction darting across
his features) “and painful as these feelings are, I would not exchange
them for that torpor which the stoic mistakes for philosophy. How many
exquisite delights should I have passed by unnoticed, but for these keen
sensations, this quick sense of happiness or misery? Then let us, my
friend, take the cup of life as it is presented to us, tempered by the
hand of a wise Providence; be thankful for the good, be patient under
the evil, and presume not to enquire why the latter predominates.”

“This is true philosophy,” said Temple.

“'Tis the only way to reconcile ourselves to the cross events of life,”
 replied he. “But I forget myself. I will not longer intrude on your
patience, but proceed in my melancholy tale.

“The very evening that I was taken to prison, my son arrived from
Ireland, where he had been some time with his regiment. From the
distracted expressions of his mother and sister, he learnt by whom I
had been arrested; and, late as it was, flew on the wings of wounded
affection, to the house of his false friend, and earnestly enquired the
cause of this cruel conduct. With all the calmness of a cool deliberate
villain, he avowed his passion for Lucy; declared her situation in
life would not permit him to marry her; but offered to release me
immediately, and make any settlement on her, if George would persuade
her to live, as he impiously termed it, a life of honour.

“Fired at the insult offered to a man and a soldier, my boy struck the
villain, and a challenge ensued. He then went to a coffee-house in
the neighbourhood and wrote a long affectionate letter to me, blaming
himself severely for having introduced Lewis into the family, or
permitted him to confer an obligation, which had brought inevitable
ruin on us all. He begged me, whatever might be the event of the ensuing
morning, not to suffer regret or unavailing sorrow for his fate, to
increase the anguish of my heart, which he greatly feared was already
insupportable.

“This letter was delivered to me early in the morning. It would be vain
to attempt describing my feelings on the perusal of it; suffice it to
say, that a merciful Providence interposed, and I was for three weeks
insensible to miseries almost beyond the strength of human nature to
support.

“A fever and strong delirium seized me, and my life was despaired of. At
length, nature, overpowered with fatigue, gave way to the salutary power
of rest, and a quiet slumber of some hours restored me to reason, though
the extreme weakness of my frame prevented my feeling my distress so
acutely as I otherways should.

“The first object that struck me on awaking, was Lucy sitting by my
bedside; her pale countenance and sable dress prevented my enquiries for
poor George: for the letter I had received from him, was the first thing
that occurred to my memory. By degrees the rest returned: I recollected
being arrested, but could no ways account for being in this apartment,
whither they had conveyed me during my illness.

“I was so weak as to be almost unable to speak. I pressed Lucy's hand,
and looked earnestly round the apartment in search of another dear
object.

“Where is your mother?” said I, faintly.

“The poor girl could not answer: she shook her head in expressive
silence; and throwing herself on the bed, folded her arms about me, and
burst into tears.

“What! both gone?” said I.

“Both,” she replied, endeavouring to restrain her emotions: “but they
are happy, no doubt.”

Here Mr. Eldridge paused: the recollection of the scene was too painful
to permit him to proceed.




CHAPTER IV.

CHANGE OF FORTUNE.

“IT was some days,” continued Mr. Eldridge, recovering himself, “before
I could venture to enquire the particulars of what had happened during
my illness: at length I assumed courage to ask my dear girl how long her
mother and brother had been dead: she told me, that the morning after
my arrest, George came home early to enquire after his mother's health,
staid with them but a few minutes, seemed greatly agitated at parting,
but gave them strict charge to keep up their spirits, and hope every
thing would turn out for the best. In about two hours after, as they
were sitting at breakfast, and endeavouring to strike out some plan to
attain my liberty, they heard a loud rap at the door, which Lucy running
to open, she met the bleeding body of her brother, borne in by two men
who had lifted him from a litter, on which they had brought him from
the place where he fought. Her poor mother, weakened by illness and the
struggles of the preceding night, was not able to support this shock;
gasping for breath, her looks wild and haggard, she reached the
apartment where they had carried her dying son. She knelt by the bed
side; and taking his cold hand, 'my poor boy,' said she, 'I will not be
parted from thee: husband! son! both at once lost. Father of mercies,
spare me!' She fell into a strong convulsion, and expired in about two
hours. In the mean time, a surgeon had dressed George's wounds; but they
were in such a situation as to bar the smallest hopes of recovery. He
never was sensible from the time he was brought home, and died that
evening in the arms of his sister.

“Late as it was when this event took place, my affectionate Lucy
insisted on coming to me. 'What must he feel,' said she, 'at our
apparent neglect, and how shall I inform him of the afflictions with
which it has pleased heaven to visit us?'

“She left the care of the dear departed ones to some neighbours who
had kindly come in to comfort and assist her; and on entering the house
where I was confined, found me in the situation I have mentioned.

“How she supported herself in these trying moments, I know not: heaven,
no doubt, was with her; and her anxiety to preserve the life of one
parent in some measure abated her affliction for the loss of the other.

“My circumstances were greatly embarrassed, my acquaintance few,
and those few utterly unable to assist me. When my wife and son were
committed to their kindred earth, my creditors seized my house and
furniture, which not being sufficient to discharge all their demands,
detainers were lodged against me. No friend stepped forward to my
relief; from the grave of her mother, my beloved Lucy followed an almost
dying father to this melancholy place.

“Here we have been nearly a year and a half. My half-pay I have given
up to satisfy my creditors, and my child supports me by her industry:
sometimes by fine needlework, sometimes by painting. She leaves me
every night, and goes to a lodging near the bridge; but returns in
the morning, to cheer me with her smiles, and bless me by her duteous
affection. A lady once offered her an asylum in her family; but she
would not leave me. 'We are all the world to each other,' said she. 'I
thank God, I have health and spirits to improve the talents with which
nature has endowed me; and I trust if I employ them in the support of a
beloved parent, I shall not be thought an unprofitable servant. While he
lives, I pray for strength to pursue my employment; and when it pleases
heaven to take one of us, may it give the survivor resignation to bear
the separation as we ought: till then I will never leave him.'”

“But where is this inhuman persecutor?” said Temple.

“He has been abroad ever since,” replied the old man; “but he has
left orders with his lawyer never to give up the note till the utmost
farthing is paid.”

“And how much is the amount of your debts in all?” said Temple.

“Five hundred pounds,” he replied.

Temple started: it was more than he expected. “But something must be
done,” said he: “that sweet maid must not wear out her life in a prison.
I will see you again to-morrow, my friend,” said he, shaking Eldridge's
hand: “keep up your spirits: light and shade are not more happily
blended than are the pleasures and pains of life; and the horrors of the
one serve only to increase the splendor of the other.”

“You never lost a wife and son,” said Eldridge.

“No,” replied he, “but I can feel for those that have.” Eldridge pressed
his hand as they went toward the door, and they parted in silence.

When they got without the walls of the prison, Temple thanked his friend
Blakeney for introducing him to so worthy a character; and telling him
he had a particular engagement in the city, wished him a good evening.

“And what is to be done for this distressed man,” said Temple, as he
walked up Ludgate Hill. “Would to heaven I had a fortune that would
enable me instantly to discharge his debt: what exquisite transport, to
see the expressive eyes of Lucy beaming at once with pleasure for her
father's deliverance, and gratitude for her deliverer: but is not my
fortune affluence,” continued he, “nay superfluous wealth, when compared
to the extreme indigence of Eldridge; and what have I done to deserve
ease and plenty, while a brave worthy officer starves in a prison? Three
hundred a year is surely sufficient for all my wants and wishes: at any
rate Eldridge must be relieved.”

When the heart has will, the hands can soon find means to execute a good
action.

Temple was a young man, his feelings warm and impetuous; unacquainted
with the world, his heart had not been rendered callous by being
convinced of its fraud and hypocrisy. He pitied their sufferings,
overlooked their faults, thought every bosom as generous as his own, and
would cheerfully have divided his last guinea with an unfortunate fellow
creature.

No wonder, then, that such a man (without waiting a moment for the
interference of Madam Prudence) should resolve to raise money sufficient
for the relief of Eldridge, by mortgaging part of his fortune.

We will not enquire too minutely into the cause which might actuate
him in this instance: suffice it to say, he immediately put the plan in
execution; and in three days from the time he first saw the unfortunate
Lieutenant, he had the superlative felicity of seeing him at liberty,
and receiving an ample reward in the tearful eye and half articulated
thanks of the grateful Lucy.

“And pray, young man,” said his father to him one morning, “what are
your designs in visiting thus constantly that old man and his daughter?”

Temple was at a loss for a reply: he had never asked himself the
question: he hesitated; and his father continued--

“It was not till within these few days that I heard in what manner
your acquaintance first commenced, and cannot suppose any thing but
attachment to the daughter could carry you such imprudent lengths for
the father: it certainly must be her art that drew you in to mortgage
part of your fortune.”

“Art, Sir!” cried Temple eagerly. “Lucy Eldridge is as free from art as
she is from every other error: she is--”

“Everything that is amiable and lovely,” said his father, interrupting
him ironically: “no doubt in your opinion she is a pattern of excellence
for all her sex to follow; but come, Sir, pray tell me what are your
designs towards this paragon. I hope you do not intend to complete your
folly by marrying her.”

“Were my fortune such as would support her according to her merit,
I don't know a woman more formed to insure happiness in the married
state.”

“Then prithee, my dear lad,” said his father, “since your rank and
fortune are so much beneath what your PRINCESS might expect, be so kind
as to turn your eyes on Miss Weatherby; who, having only an estate of
three thousand a year, is more upon a level with you, and whose father
yesterday solicited the mighty honour of your alliance. I shall leave
you to consider on this offer; and pray remember, that your union with
Miss Weatherby will put it in your power to be more liberally the friend
of Lucy Eldridge.”

The old gentleman walked in a stately manner out of the room; and Temple
stood almost petrified with astonishment, contempt, and rage.




CHAPTER V.

SUCH THINGS ARE.

MISS Weatherby was the only child of a wealthy man, almost idolized by
her parents, flattered by her dependants, and never contradicted even
by those who called themselves her friends: I cannot give a better
description than by the following lines.

     The lovely maid whose form and face
     Nature has deck'd with ev'ry grace,
     But in whose breast no virtues glow,
     Whose heart ne'er felt another's woe,
     Whose hand ne'er smooth'd the bed of pain,
     Or eas'd the captive's galling chain;
     But like the tulip caught the eye,
     Born just to be admir'd and die;
     When gone, no one regrets its loss,
     Or scarce remembers that it was.

Such was Miss Weatherby: her form lovely as nature could make it, but
her mind uncultivated, her heart unfeeling, her passions impetuous, and
her brain almost turned with flattery, dissipation, and pleasure; and
such was the girl, whom a partial grandfather left independent mistress
of the fortune before mentioned.

She had seen Temple frequently; and fancying she could never be happy
without him, nor once imagining he could refuse a girl of her beauty and
fortune, she prevailed on her fond father to offer the alliance to the
old Earl of D----, Mr. Temple's father.

The Earl had received the offer courteously: he thought it a great match
for Henry; and was too fashionable a man to suppose a wife could be any
impediment to the friendship he professed for Eldridge and his daughter.

Unfortunately for Temple, he thought quite otherwise: the conversation
he had just had with his father, discovered to him the situation of
his heart; and he found that the most affluent fortune would bring no
increase of happiness unless Lucy Eldridge shared it with him; and the
knowledge of the purity of her sentiments, and the integrity of his own
heart, made him shudder at the idea his father had started, of marrying
a woman for no other reason than because the affluence of her fortune
would enable him to injure her by maintaining in splendor the woman
to whom his heart was devoted: he therefore resolved to refuse Miss
Weatherby, and be the event what it might, offer his heart and hand to
Lucy Eldridge.

Full of this determination, he fought his father, declared his
resolution, and was commanded never more to appear in his presence.
Temple bowed; his heart was too full to permit him to speak; he left the
house precipitately, and hastened to relate the cause of his sorrows to
his good old friend and his amiable daughter.

In the mean time, the Earl, vexed to the soul that such a fortune should
be lost, determined to offer himself a candidate for Miss Weatherby's
favour.

What wonderful changes are wrought by that reigning power, ambition! the
love-sick girl, when first she heard of Temple's refusal, wept, raved,
tore her hair, and vowed to found a protestant nunnery with her fortune;
and by commencing abbess, shut herself up from the sight of cruel
ungrateful man for ever.

Her father was a man of the world: he suffered this first transport to
subside, and then very deliberately unfolded to her the offers of the
old Earl, expatiated on the many benefits arising from an elevated
title, painted in glowing colours the surprise and vexation of Temple
when he should see her figuring as a Countess and his mother-in-law, and
begged her to consider well before she made any rash vows.

The DISTRESSED fair one dried her tears, listened patiently, and at
length declared she believed the surest method to revenge the slight put
on her by the son, would be to accept the father: so said so done, and
in a few days she became the Countess D----.

Temple heard the news with emotion: he had lost his father's favour
by avowing his passion for Lucy, and he saw now there was no hope of
regaining it: “but he shall not make me miserable,” said he. “Lucy and I
have no ambitious notions: we can live on three hundred a year for
some little time, till the mortgage is paid off, and then we shall have
sufficient not only for the comforts but many of the little elegancies
of life. We will purchase a little cottage, my Lucy,” said he, “and
thither with your reverend father we will retire; we will forget there
are such things as splendor, profusion, and dissipation: we will have
some cows, and you shall be queen of the dairy; in a morning, while I
look after my garden, you shall take a basket on your arm, and sally
forth to feed your poultry; and as they flutter round you in token of
humble gratitude, your father shall smoke his pipe in a woodbine alcove,
and viewing the serenity of your countenance, feel such real pleasure
dilate his own heart, as shall make him forget he had ever been
unhappy.”

Lucy smiled; and Temple saw it was a smile of approbation. He sought
and found a cottage suited to his taste; thither, attended by Love and
Hymen, the happy trio retired; where, during many years of uninterrupted
felicity, they cast not a wish beyond the little boundaries of their own
tenement. Plenty, and her handmaid, Prudence, presided at their board,
Hospitality stood at their gate, Peace smiled on each face, Content
reigned in each heart, and Love and Health strewed roses on their
pillows.

Such were the parents of Charlotte Temple, who was the only pledge of
their mutual love, and who, at the earnest entreaty of a particular
friend, was permitted to finish the education her mother had begun,
at Madame Du Pont's school, where we first introduced her to the
acquaintance of the reader.




CHAPTER VI.

AN INTRIGUING TEACHER.

MADAME Du Pont was a woman every way calculated to take the care of
young ladies, had that care entirely devolved on herself; but it was
impossible to attend the education of a numerous school without proper
assistants; and those assistants were not always the kind of people
whose conversation and morals were exactly such as parents of delicacy
and refinement would wish a daughter to copy. Among the teachers
at Madame Du Pont's school, was Mademoiselle La Rue, who added to a
pleasing person and insinuating address, a liberal education and the
manners of a gentlewoman. She was recommended to the school by a lady
whose humanity overstepped the bounds of discretion: for though she
knew Miss La Rue had eloped from a convent with a young officer, and, on
coming to England, had lived with several different men in open defiance
of all moral and religious duties; yet, finding her reduced to the
most abject want, and believing the penitence which she professed to be
sincere, she took her into her own family, and from thence recommended
her to Madame Du Pont, as thinking the situation more suitable for
a woman of her abilities. But Mademoiselle possessed too much of the
spirit of intrigue to remain long without adventures. At church, where
she constantly appeared, her person attracted the attention of a young
man who was upon a visit at a gentleman's seat in the neighbourhood: she
had met him several times clandestinely; and being invited to come out
that evening, and eat some fruit and pastry in a summer-house belonging
to the gentleman he was visiting, and requested to bring some of
the ladies with her, Charlotte being her favourite, was fixed on to
accompany her.

The mind of youth eagerly catches at promised pleasure: pure and
innocent by nature, it thinks not of the dangers lurking beneath
those pleasures, till too late to avoid them: when Mademoiselle asked
Charlotte to go with her, she mentioned the gentleman as a relation,
and spoke in such high terms of the elegance of his gardens, the
sprightliness of his conversation, and the liberality with which he ever
entertained his guests, that Charlotte thought only of the pleasure she
should enjoy in the visit,--not on the imprudence of going without her
governess's knowledge, or of the danger to which she exposed herself in
visiting the house of a gay young man of fashion.

Madame Du Pont was gone out for the evening, and the rest of the ladies
retired to rest, when Charlotte and the teacher stole out at the back
gate, and in crossing the field, were accosted by Montraville, as
mentioned in the first CHAPTER.

Charlotte was disappointed in the pleasure she had promised herself
from this visit. The levity of the gentlemen and the freedom of
their conversation disgusted her. She was astonished at the liberties
Mademoiselle permitted them to take; grew thoughtful and uneasy, and
heartily wished herself at home again in her own chamber.

Perhaps one cause of that wish might be, an earnest desire to see the
contents of the letter which had been put into her hand by Montraville.

Any reader who has the least knowledge of the world, will easily
imagine the letter was made up of encomiums on her beauty, and vows of
everlasting love and constancy; nor will he be surprised that a heart
open to every gentle, generous sentiment, should feel itself warmed by
gratitude for a man who professed to feel so much for her; nor is it
improbable but her mind might revert to the agreeable person and martial
appearance of Montraville.

In affairs of love, a young heart is never in more danger than
when attempted by a handsome young soldier. A man of an indifferent
appearance, will, when arrayed in a military habit, shew to advantage;
but when beauty of person, elegance of manner, and an easy method of
paying compliments, are united to the scarlet coat, smart cockade, and
military sash, ah! well-a-day for the poor girl who gazes on him: she
is in imminent danger; but if she listens to him with pleasure, 'tis all
over with her, and from that moment she has neither eyes nor ears for
any other object.

Now, my dear sober matron, (if a sober matron should deign to turn over
these pages, before she trusts them to the eye of a darling daughter,)
let me intreat you not to put on a grave face, and throw down the book
in a passion and declare 'tis enough to turn the heads of half the girls
in England; I do solemnly protest, my dear madam, I mean no more by
what I have here advanced, than to ridicule those romantic girls, who
foolishly imagine a red coat and silver epaulet constitute the fine
gentleman; and should that fine gentleman make half a dozen fine
speeches to them, they will imagine themselves so much in love as
to fancy it a meritorious action to jump out of a two pair of stairs
window, abandon their friends, and trust entirely to the honour of a
man, who perhaps hardly knows the meaning of the word, and if he does,
will be too much the modern man of refinement, to practice it in their
favour.

Gracious heaven! when I think on the miseries that must rend the heart
of a doating parent, when he sees the darling of his age at first
seduced from his protection, and afterwards abandoned, by the very
wretch whose promises of love decoyed her from the paternal roof--when
he sees her poor and wretched, her bosom tom between remorse for her
crime and love for her vile betrayer--when fancy paints to me the good
old man stooping to raise the weeping penitent, while every tear from
her eye is numbered by drops from his bleeding heart, my bosom glows
with honest indignation, and I wish for power to extirpate those
monsters of seduction from the earth.

Oh my dear girls--for to such only am I writing--listen not to the voice
of love, unless sanctioned by paternal approbation: be assured, it is
now past the days of romance: no woman can be run away with contrary
to her own inclination: then kneel down each morning, and request kind
heaven to keep you free from temptation, or, should it please to suffer
you to be tried, pray for fortitude to resist the impulse of inclination
when it runs counter to the precepts of religion and virtue.




CHAPTER VII.

NATURAL SENSE OF PROPRIETY INHERENT IN THE FEMALE BOSOM.

“I CANNOT think we have done exactly right in going out this evening,
Mademoiselle,” said Charlotte, seating herself when she entered her
apartment: “nay, I am sure it was not right; for I expected to be very
happy, but was sadly disappointed.”

“It was your own fault, then,” replied Mademoiselle: “for I am sure
my cousin omitted nothing that could serve to render the evening
agreeable.”

“True,” said Charlotte: “but I thought the gentlemen were very free in
their manner: I wonder you would suffer them to behave as they did.”

“Prithee, don't be such a foolish little prude,” said the artful woman,
affecting anger: “I invited you to go in hopes it would divert you, and
be an agreeable change of scene; however, if your delicacy was hurt by
the behaviour of the gentlemen, you need not go again; so there let it
rest.”

“I do not intend to go again,” said Charlotte, gravely taking off her
bonnet, and beginning to prepare for bed: “I am sure, if Madame Du Pont
knew we had been out to-night, she would be very angry; and it is ten to
one but she hears of it by some means or other.”

“Nay, Miss,” said La Rue, “perhaps your mighty sense of propriety may
lead you to tell her yourself: and in order to avoid the censure you
would incur, should she hear of it by accident, throw the blame on
me: but I confess I deserve it: it will be a very kind return for that
partiality which led me to prefer you before any of the rest of the
ladies; but perhaps it will give you pleasure,” continued she, letting
fall some hypocritical tears, “to see me deprived of bread, and for an
action which by the most rigid could only be esteemed an inadvertency,
lose my place and character, and be driven again into the world, where I
have already suffered all the evils attendant on poverty.”

This was touching Charlotte in the most vulnerable part: she rose from
her seat, and taking Mademoiselle's hand--“You know, my dear La Rue,”
 said she, “I love you too well, to do anything that would injure you in
my governess's opinion: I am only sorry we went out this evening.”

“I don't believe it, Charlotte,” said she, assuming a little vivacity;
“for if you had not gone out, you would not have seen the gentleman who
met us crossing the field; and I rather think you were pleased with his
conversation.”

“I had seen him once before,” replied Charlotte, “and thought him an
agreeable man; and you know one is always pleased to see a person with
whom one has passed several cheerful hours. But,” said she pausing,
and drawing the letter from her pocket, while a gentle suffusion of
vermillion tinged her neck and face, “he gave me this letter; what shall
I do with it?”

“Read it, to be sure,” returned Mademoiselle.

“I am afraid I ought not,” said Charlotte: “my mother has often told
me, I should never read a letter given me by a young man, without first
giving it to her.”

“Lord bless you, my dear girl,” cried the teacher smiling, “have you
a mind to be in leading strings all your life time. Prithee open the
letter, read it, and judge for yourself; if you show it your mother, the
consequence will be, you will be taken from school, and a strict guard
kept over you; so you will stand no chance of ever seeing the smart
young officer again.”

“I should not like to leave school yet,” replied Charlotte, “till I have
attained a greater proficiency in my Italian and music. But you can, if
you please, Mademoiselle, take the letter back to Montraville, and
tell him I wish him well, but cannot, with any propriety, enter into a
clandestine correspondence with him.” She laid the letter on the table,
and began to undress herself.

“Well,” said La Rue, “I vow you are an unaccountable girl: have you
no curiosity to see the inside now? for my part I could no more let a
letter addressed to me lie unopened so long, than I could work miracles:
he writes a good hand,” continued she, turning the letter, to look at
the superscription.

“'Tis well enough,” said Charlotte, drawing it towards her.

“He is a genteel young fellow,” said La Rue carelessly, folding up her
apron at the same time; “but I think he is marked with the small pox.”

“Oh you are greatly mistaken,” said Charlotte eagerly; “he has a
remarkable clear skin and fine complexion.”

“His eyes, if I could judge by what I saw,” said La Rue, “are grey and
want expression.”

“By no means,” replied Charlotte; “they are the most expressive eyes
I ever saw.” “Well, child, whether they are grey or black is of no
consequence: you have determined not to read his letter; so it is likely
you will never either see or hear from him again.”

Charlotte took up the letter, and Mademoiselle continued--

“He is most probably going to America; and if ever you should hear any
account of him, it may possibly be that he is killed; and though he
loved you ever so fervently, though his last breath should be spent in
a prayer for your happiness, it can be nothing to you: you can feel
nothing for the fate of the man, whose letters you will not open, and
whose sufferings you will not alleviate, by permitting him to think you
would remember him when absent, and pray for his safety.”

Charlotte still held the letter in her hand: her heart swelled at the
conclusion of Mademoiselle's speech, and a tear dropped upon the wafer
that closed it.

“The wafer is not dry yet,” said she, “and sure there can be no great
harm--” She hesitated. La Rue was silent. “I may read it, Mademoiselle,
and return it afterwards.”

“Certainly,” replied Mademoiselle.

“At any rate I am determined not to answer it,” continued Charlotte, as
she opened the letter.

Here let me stop to make one remark, and trust me my very heart aches
while I write it; but certain I am, that when once a woman has stifled
the sense of shame in her own bosom, when once she has lost sight of the
basis on which reputation, honour, every thing that should be dear to
the female heart, rests, she grows hardened in guilt, and will spare
no pains to bring down innocence and beauty to the shocking level with
herself: and this proceeds from that diabolical spirit of envy, which
repines at seeing another in the full possession of that respect and
esteem which she can no longer hope to enjoy.

Mademoiselle eyed the unsuspecting Charlotte, as she perused the letter,
with a malignant pleasure. She saw, that the contents had awakened new
emotions in her youthful bosom: she encouraged her hopes, calmed her
fears, and before they parted for the night, it was determined that she
should meet Montraville the ensuing evening.




CHAPTER VIII.

DOMESTIC PLEASURES PLANNED.

“I THINK, my dear,” said Mrs. Temple, laying her hand on her husband's
arm as they were walking together in the garden, “I think next Wednesday
is Charlotte's birth day: now I have formed a little scheme in my own
mind, to give her an agreeable surprise; and if you have no objection,
we will send for her home on that day.” Temple pressed his wife's hand
in token of approbation, and she proceeded.--“You know the little alcove
at the bottom of the garden, of which Charlotte is so fond? I have an
inclination to deck this out in a fanciful manner, and invite all her
little friends to partake of a collation of fruit, sweetmeats, and other
things suitable to the general taste of young guests; and to make it
more pleasing to Charlotte, she shall be mistress of the feast, and
entertain her visitors in this alcove. I know she will be delighted; and
to complete all, they shall have some music, and finish with a dance.”

“A very fine plan, indeed,” said Temple, smiling; “and you really
suppose I will wink at your indulging the girl in this manner? You will
quite spoil her, Lucy; indeed you will.”

“She is the only child we have,” said Mrs. Temple, the whole tenderness
of a mother adding animation to her fine countenance; but it was withal
tempered so sweetly with the meek affection and submissive duty of the
wife, that as she paused expecting her husband's answer, he gazed at her
tenderly, and found he was unable to refuse her request.

“She is a good girl,” said Temple.

“She is, indeed,” replied the fond mother exultingly, “a grateful,
affectionate girl; and I am sure will never lose sight of the duty she
owes her parents.”

“If she does,” said he, “she must forget the example set her by the best
of mothers.”

Mrs. Temple could not reply; but the delightful sensation that dilated
her heart sparkled in her intelligent eyes and heightened the vermillion
on her cheeks.

Of all the pleasures of which the human mind is sensible, there is
none equal to that which warms and expands the bosom, when listening to
commendations bestowed on us by a beloved object, and are conscious of
having deserved them.

Ye giddy flutterers in the fantastic round of dissipation, who eagerly
seek pleasure in the lofty dome, rich treat, and midnight revel--tell
me, ye thoughtless daughters of folly, have ye ever found the phantom
you have so long sought with such unremitted assiduity? Has she not
always eluded your grasp, and when you have reached your hand to take
the cup she extends to her deluded votaries, have you not found the
long-expected draught strongly tinctured with the bitter dregs of
disappointment? I know you have: I see it in the wan cheek, sunk
eye, and air of chagrin, which ever mark the children of dissipation.
Pleasure is a vain illusion; she draws you on to a thousand follies,
errors, and I may say vices, and then leaves you to deplore your
thoughtless credulity.

Look, my dear friends, at yonder lovely Virgin, arrayed in a white robe
devoid of ornament; behold the meekness of her countenance, the
modesty of her gait; her handmaids are Humility, Filial Piety, Conjugal
Affection, Industry, and Benevolence; her name is CONTENT; she holds
in her hand the cup of true felicity, and when once you have formed an
intimate acquaintance with these her attendants, nay you must admit them
as your bosom friends and chief counsellors, then, whatever may be your
situation in life, the meek eyed Virgin wig immediately take up her
abode with you.

Is poverty your portion?--she will lighten your labours, preside at your
frugal board, and watch your quiet slumbers.

Is your state mediocrity?--she will heighten every blessing you enjoy,
by informing you how grateful you should be to that bountiful Providence
who might have placed you in the most abject situation; and, by teaching
you to weigh your blessings against your deserts, show you how much more
you receive than you have a right to expect.

Are you possessed of affluence?--what an inexhaustible fund of happiness
will she lay before you! To relieve the distressed, redress the injured,
in short, to perform all the good works of peace and mercy.

Content, my dear friends, will blunt even the arrows of adversity, so
that they cannot materially harm you. She will dwell in the humblest
cottage; she will attend you even to a prison. Her parent is Religion;
her sisters, Patience and Hope. She will pass with you through life,
smoothing the rough paths and tread to earth those thorns which every
one must meet with as they journey onward to the appointed goal. She
will soften the pains of sickness, continue with you even in the
cold gloomy hour of death, and, cheating you with the smiles of her
heaven-born sister, Hope, lead you triumphant to a blissful eternity.

I confess I have rambled strangely from my story: but what of that? if
I have been so lucky as to find the road to happiness, why should I be
such a niggard as to omit so good an opportunity of pointing out the way
to others. The very basis of true peace of mind is a benevolent wish to
see all the world as happy as one's Self; and from my soul do I pity the
selfish churl, who, remembering the little bickerings of anger, envy,
and fifty other disagreeables to which frail mortality is subject, would
wish to revenge the affront which pride whispers him he has received.
For my own part, I can safely declare, there is not a human being in
the universe, whose prosperity I should not rejoice in, and to whose
happiness I would not contribute to the utmost limit of my power: and
may my offences be no more remembered in the day of general retribution,
than as from my soul I forgive every offence or injury received from a
fellow creature.

Merciful heaven! who would exchange the rapture of such a reflexion for
all the gaudy tinsel which the world calls pleasure!

But to return.--Content dwelt in Mrs. Temple's bosom, and spread a
charming animation over her countenance, as her husband led her in, to
lay the plan she had formed (for the celebration of Charlotte's birth
day,) before Mr. Eldridge.




CHAPTER IX.

WE KNOW NOT WHAT A DAY MAY BRING FORTH.

VARIOUS were the sensations which agitated the mind of Charlotte, during
the day preceding the evening in which she was to meet Montraville.
Several times did she almost resolve to go to her governess, show her
the letter, and be guided by her advice: but Charlotte had taken one
step in the ways of imprudence; and when that is once done, there are
always innumerable obstacles to prevent the erring person returning to
the path of rectitude: yet these obstacles, however forcible they may
appear in general, exist chiefly in imagination.

Charlotte feared the anger of her governess: she loved her mother,
and the very idea of incurring her displeasure, gave her the greatest
uneasiness: but there was a more forcible reason still remaining: should
she show the letter to Madame Du Pont, she must confess the means by
which it came into her possession; and what would be the consequence?
Mademoiselle would be turned out of doors.

“I must not be ungrateful,” said she. “La Rue is very kind to me;
besides I can, when I see Montraville, inform him of the impropriety of
our continuing to see or correspond with each other, and request him to
come no more to Chichester.”

However prudent Charlotte might be in these resolutions, she certainly
did not take a proper method to confirm herself in them. Several times
in the course of the day, she indulged herself in reading over the
letter, and each time she read it, the contents sunk deeper in her
heart. As evening drew near, she caught herself frequently consulting
her watch. “I wish this foolish meeting was over,” said she, by way of
apology to her own heart, “I wish it was over; for when I have seen him,
and convinced him my resolution is not to be shaken, I shall feel my
mind much easier.”

The appointed hour arrived. Charlotte and Mademoiselle eluded the eye of
vigilance; and Montraville, who had waited their coming with impatience,
received them with rapturous and unbounded acknowledgments for their
condescension: he had wisely brought Belcour with him to entertain
Mademoiselle, while he enjoyed an uninterrupted conversation with
Charlotte.

Belcour was a man whose character might be comprised in a few words; and
as he will make some figure in the ensuing pages, I shall here describe
him. He possessed a genteel fortune, and had a liberal education;
dissipated, thoughtless, and capricious, he paid little regard to
the moral duties, and less to religious ones: eager in the pursuit of
pleasure, he minded not the miseries he inflicted on others, provided
his own wishes, however extravagant, were gratified. Self, darling self,
was the idol he worshipped, and to that he would have sacrificed
the interest and happiness of all mankind. Such was the friend of
Montraville: will not the reader be ready to imagine, that the man who
could regard such a character, must be actuated by the same feelings,
follow the same pursuits, and be equally unworthy with the person to
whom he thus gave his confidence?

But Montraville was a different character: generous in his disposition,
liberal in his opinions, and good-natured almost to a fault; yet eager
and impetuous in the pursuit of a favorite object, he staid not to
reflect on the consequence which might follow the attainment of his
wishes; with a mind ever open to conviction, had he been so fortunate
as to possess a friend who would have pointed out the cruelty of
endeavouring to gain the heart of an innocent artless girl, when he
knew it was utterly impossible for him to marry her, and when the
gratification of his passion would be unavoidable infamy and misery to
her, and a cause of never-ceasing remorse to himself: had these dreadful
consequences been placed before him in a proper light, the humanity of
his nature would have urged him to give up the pursuit: but Belcour
was not this friend; he rather encouraged the growing passion of
Montraville; and being pleased with the vivacity of Mademoiselle,
resolved to leave no argument untried, which he thought might prevail on
her to be the companion of their intended voyage; and he made no doubt
but her example, added to the rhetoric of Montraville, would persuade
Charlotte to go with them.

Charlotte had, when she went out to meet Montraville, flattered herself
that her resolution was not to be shaken, and that, conscious of the
impropriety of her conduct in having a clandestine intercourse with a
stranger, she would never repeat the indiscretion.

But alas! poor Charlotte, she knew not the deceitfulness of her own
heart, or she would have avoided the trial of her stability.

Montraville was tender, eloquent, ardent, and yet respectful. “Shall I
not see you once more,” said he, “before I leave England? will you not
bless me by an assurance, that when we are divided by a vast expanse of
sea I shall not be forgotten?”

Charlotte sighed.

“Why that sigh, my dear Charlotte? could I flatter myself that a fear
for my safety, or a wish for my welfare occasioned it, how happy would
it make me.”

“I shall ever wish you well, Montraville,” said she; “but we must meet
no more.” “Oh say not so, my lovely girl: reflect, that when I leave my
native land, perhaps a few short weeks may terminate my existence; the
perils of the ocean--the dangers of war--”

“I can hear no more,” said Charlotte in a tremulous voice. “I must leave
you.”

“Say you will see me once again.”

“I dare not,” said she.

“Only for one half hour to-morrow evening: 'tis my last request. I shall
never trouble you again, Charlotte.”

“I know not what to say,” cried Charlotte, struggling to draw her hands
from him: “let me leave you now.”

“And you will come to-morrow,” said Montraville.

“Perhaps I may,” said she.

“Adieu then. I will live upon that hope till we meet again.”

He kissed her hand. She sighed an adieu, and catching hold of
Mademoiselle's arm, hastily entered the garden gate.




CHAPTER X.

WHEN WE HAVE EXCITED CURIOSITY, IT IS BUT AN ACT OF GOOD NATURE TO
GRATIFY IT.

MONTRAVILLE was the youngest son of a gentleman of fortune, whose
family being numerous, he was obliged to bring up his sons to genteel
professions, by the exercise of which they might hope to raise
themselves into notice.

“My daughters,” said he, “have been educated like gentlewomen; and
should I die before they are settled, they must have some provision
made, to place them above the snares and temptations which vice ever
holds out to the elegant, accomplished female, when oppressed by the
frowns of poverty and the sting of dependance: my boys, with only
moderate incomes, when placed in the church, at the bar, or in the
field, may exert their talents, make themselves friends, and raise their
fortunes on the basis of merit.”

When Montraville chose the profession of arms, his father presented him
with a commission, and made him a handsome provision for his private
purse. “Now, my boy,” said he, “go! seek glory in the field of battle.
You have received from me all I shall ever have it in my power to
bestow: it is certain I have interest to gain you promotion; but be
assured that interest shall never be exerted, unless by your future
conduct you deserve it. Remember, therefore, your success in life
depends entirely on yourself. There is one thing I think it my duty to
caution you against; the precipitancy with which young men frequently
rush into matrimonial engagements, and by their thoughtlessness draw
many a deserving woman into scenes of poverty and distress. A soldier
has no business to think of a wife till his rank is such as to place him
above the fear of bringing into the world a train of helpless innocents,
heirs only to penury and affliction. If, indeed, a woman, whose fortune
is sufficient to preserve you in that state of independence I would
teach you to prize, should generously bestow herself on a young soldier,
whose chief hope of future prosperity depended on his success in the
field--if such a woman should offer--every barrier is removed, and I
should rejoice in an union which would promise so much felicity. But
mark me, boy, if, on the contrary, you rush into a precipitate union
with a girl of little or no fortune, take the poor creature from a
comfortable home and kind friends, and plunge her into all the evils
a narrow income and increasing family can inflict, I will leave you to
enjoy the blessed fruits of your rashness; for by all that is sacred,
neither my interest or fortune shall ever be exerted in your favour. I
am serious,” continued he, “therefore imprint this conversation on your
memory, and let it influence your future conduct. Your happiness will
always be dear to me; and I wish to warn you of a rock on which the
peace of many an honest fellow has been wrecked; for believe me, the
difficulties and dangers of the longest winter campaign are much easier
to be borne, than the pangs that would seize your heart, when you beheld
the woman of your choice, the children of your affection, involved
in penury and distress, and reflected that it was your own folly and
precipitancy had been the prime cause of their sufferings.”

As this conversation passed but a few hours before Montraville took
leave of his father, it was deeply impressed on his mind: when,
therefore, Belcour came with him to the place of assignation with
Charlotte, he directed him to enquire of the French woman what were Miss
Temple's expectations in regard to fortune.

Mademoiselle informed him, that though Charlotte's father possessed a
genteel independence, it was by no means probable that he could give his
daughter more than a thousand pounds; and in case she did not marry to
his liking, it was possible he might not give her a single SOUS; nor
did it appear the least likely, that Mr. Temple would agree to her union
with a young man on the point of embarking for the feat of war.

Montraville therefore concluded it was impossible he should ever marry
Charlotte Temple; and what end he proposed to himself by continuing the
acquaintance he had commenced with her, he did not at that moment give
himself time to enquire.




CHAPTER XI.

CONFLICT OF LOVE AND DUTY.

ALMOST a week was now gone, and Charlotte continued every evening to
meet Montraville, and in her heart every meeting was resolved to be the
last; but alas! when Montraville at parting would earnestly intreat one
more interview, that treacherous heart betrayed her; and, forgetful
of its resolution, pleaded the cause of the enemy so powerfully, that
Charlotte was unable to resist. Another and another meeting succeeded;
and so well did Montraville improve each opportunity, that the heedless
girl at length confessed no idea could be so painful to her as that of
never seeing him again.

“Then we will never be parted,” said he.

“Ah, Montraville,” replied Charlotte, forcing a smile, “how can it be
avoided? My parents would never consent to our union; and even could
they be brought to approve it, how should I bear to be separated from my
kind, my beloved mother?”

“Then you love your parents more than you do me, Charlotte?”

“I hope I do,” said she, blushing and looking down, “I hope my affection
for them will ever keep me from infringing the laws of filial duty.”

“Well, Charlotte,” said Montraville gravely, and letting go her hand,
“since that is the case, I find I have deceived myself with fallacious
hopes. I had flattered my fond heart, that I was dearer to Charlotte
than any thing in the world beside. I thought that you would for my sake
have braved the dangers of the ocean, that you would, by your affection
and smiles, have softened the hardships of war, and, had it been my fate
to fall, that your tenderness would cheer the hour of death, and smooth
my passage to another world. But farewel, Charlotte! I see you never
loved me. I shall now welcome the friendly ball that deprives me of the
sense of my misery.”

“Oh stay, unkind Montraville,” cried she, catching hold of his arm, as
