The Project Gutenberg eBook of Child Christopher and Goldilind the Fair
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Child Christopher and Goldilind the Fair

Author: William Morris


        
Release date: July 2, 2008 [eBook #234]

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/234

Credits: Produced by John Hamm and David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHILD CHRISTOPHER AND GOLDILIND THE FAIR ***




Produced by John Hamm





CHILD CHRISTOPHER AND GOLDILIND THE FAIR

by William Morris

1895




CHAPTER I. OF THE KING OF OAKENREALM, AND HIS WIFE AND HIS CHILD.


Of old there was a land which was so much a woodland, that a minstrel
thereof said it that a squirrel might go from end to end, and all about,
from tree to tree, and never touch the earth: therefore was that land
called Oakenrealm.

The lord and king thereof was a stark man, and so great a warrior that
in his youth he took no delight in aught else save battle and tourneys.
But when he was hard on forty years old, he came across a daughter of
a certain lord, whom he had vanquished, and his eyes bewrayed him
into longing, so that he gave back to the said lord the havings he had
conquered of him that he might lay the maiden in his kingly bed. So he
brought her home with him to Oakenrealm and wedded her.

Tells the tale that he rued not his bargain, but loved her so dearly
that for a year round he wore no armour, save when she bade him play in
the tilt-yard for her desport and pride.

So wore the days till she went with child and was near her time, and
then it betid that three kings who marched on Oakenrealm banded them
together against him, and his lords and thanes cried out on him to lead
them to battle, and it behoved him to do as they would.

So he sent out the tokens and bade an hosting at his chief city, and
when all was ready he said farewell to his wife and her babe unborn, and
went his ways to battle once more: but fierce was his heart against the
foemen, that they had dragged him away from his love and his joy.

Even amidst of his land he joined battle with the host of the ravagers,
and the tale of them is short to tell, for they were as the wheat before
the hook. But as he followed up the chase, a mere thrall of the fleers
turned on him and cast his spear, and it reached him whereas his hawberk
was broken, and stood deep in, so that he fell to earth unmighty: and
when his lords and chieftains drew about him, and cunning men strove to
heal him, it was of no avail, and he knew that his soul was departing.
Then he sent for a priest, and for the Marshal of the host, who was a
great lord, and the son of his father's brother, and in few words bade
him look to the babe whom his wife bore about, and if it were a man, to
cherish him and do him to learn all that a king ought to know; and if it
were a maiden, that he should look to her wedding well and worthily: and
he let swear him on his sword, on the edges and the hilts, that he would
do even so, and be true unto his child if child there were: and he bade
him have rule, if so be the lords would, and all the people, till the
child were of age to be king: and the Marshal swore, and all the lords
who stood around bare witness to his swearing. Thereafter the priest
houselled the King, and he received his Creator, and a little while
after his soul departed.

But the Marshal followed up the fleeing foe, and two battles more he
fought before he beat them flat to earth; and then they craved for
peace, and he went back to the city in mickle honour.

But in the King's city of Oakenham he found but little joy; for both
the King was bemoaned, whereas he had been no hard man to his folk; and
also, when the tidings and the King's corpse came back to Oakenrealm,
his Lady and Queen took sick for sorrow and fear, and fell into labour
of her child, and in childing of a man-bairn she died, but the lad
lived, and was like to do well.

So there was one funeral for the slain King and for her whom his slaying
had slain: and when that was done, the little king was borne to the
font, and at his christening he gat to name Christopher.

Thereafter the Marshal summoned all them that were due thereto to come
and give homage to the new king, and even so did they, though he were
but a babe, yea, and who had but just now been a king lying in his
mother's womb. But when the homage was done, then the Marshal called
together the wise men, and told them how the King that was had given him
in charge his son as then unborn, and the ruling of the realm till the
said son were come to man's estate: but he bade them seek one worthier
if they had heart to gainsay the word of their dying lord. Then all they
said that he was worthy and mighty and the choice of their dear lord,
and that they would have none but he.

So then was the great folk-mote called, and the same matter was laid
before all the people, and none said aught against it, whereas no man
was ready to name another to that charge and rule, even had it been his
own self.

Now then by law was the Marshal, who hight Rolf, lord and earl of the
land of Oakenrealm. He ruled well and strongly, and was a fell warrior:
he was well befriended by many of the great; and the rest of them feared
him and his friends: as for the commonalty, they saw that he held the
realm in peace; and for the rest, they knew little and saw less of him,
and they paid to his bailiffs and sheriffs as little as they could, and
more than they would. But whereas that left them somewhat to grind their
teeth on, and they were not harried, they were not so ill content. So
the Marshal throve, and lacked nothing of a king's place save the bare
name.




CHAPTER II. OF THE KING'S SON.


As for the King's son, to whom the folk had of late done homage as king,
he was at first seen about a corner of the High House with his nurses;
and then in a while it was said, and the tale noted, but not much, that
he must needs go for his health's sake, and because he was puny, to some
stead amongst the fields, and folk heard say that he was gone to the
strong house of a knight somewhat stricken in years, who was called Lord
Richard the Lean. The said house was some twelve miles from Oakenham,
not far from the northern edge of the wild-wood. But in a while, scarce
more than a year, Lord Richard brake up house at the said castle, and
went southward through the forest. Of this departure was little said,
for he was not a man amongst the foremost. As for the King's little son,
if any remembered that he was in the hands of the said Lord Richard,
none said aught about it; for if any thought of the little babe at all,
they said to themselves, Never will he come to be king.

Now as for Lord Richard the Lean, he went far through the wood, and
until he was come to another house of his, that stood in a clearing
somewhat near to where Oakenrealm marched on another country, which
hight Meadham; though the said wild-wood ended not where Oakenrealm
ended, but stretched a good way into Meadham; and betwixt one and the
other much rough country there was.

It is to be said that amongst those who went to this stronghold of the
woods was the little King Christopher, no longer puny, but a stout
babe enough: so he was borne amongst the serving men and thralls to
the castle of the Outer March; and he was in no wise treated as a great
man's son; but there was more than one woman who was kind to him, and
as he waxed in strength and beauty month by month, both carle and
quean fell to noting him, and, for as little as he was, he began to be
well-beloved.

As to the stead where he was nourished, though it were far away amongst
the woods, it was no such lonely or savage place: besides the castle and
the houses of it, there was a merry thorpe in the clearing, the houses
whereof were set down by the side of a clear and pleasant little stream.
Moreover the goodmen and swains of the said township were no ill folk,
but bold of heart, free of speech, and goodly of favour; and the women
of them fair, kind, and trusty. Whiles came folk journeying in to
Oakenrealm or out to Meadham, and of these some were minstrels, who had
with them tidings of what was astir whereas folk were thicker in the
world, and some chapmen, who chaffered with the thorpe-dwellers, and
took of them the woodland spoil for such outland goods as those woodmen
needed.

So wore the years, and in Oakenham King Christopher was well nigh
forgotten, and in the wild-wood had never been known clearly for King's
son. At first, by command of Rolf the Marshal, a messenger came
every year from Lord Richard with a letter that told of how the lad
Christopher did. But when five years were worn, the Marshal bade send
him tidings thereof every three years; and by then it was come to the
twelfth year, and still the tidings were that the lad throve ever, and
meanwhile the Marshal sat fast in his seat with none to gainsay, the
word went to Lord Richard that he should send no more, for that he, the
Marshal, had heard enough of the boy; and if he throve it were well, and
if not, it was no worse. So wore the days and the years.




CHAPTER III. OF THE KING OF MEADHAM AND HIS DAUGHTER.


Tells the tale that in the country which lay south of Oakenrealm, and
was called Meadham, there was in these days a king whose wife was dead,
but had left him a fair daughter, who was born some four years after
King Christopher. A good man was this King Roland, mild, bounteous, and
no regarder of persons in his justice; and well-beloved he was of his
folk: yet could not their love keep him alive; for, whenas his daughter
was of the age of twelve years, he sickened unto death; and so, when he
knew that his end drew near, he sent for the wisest of his wise men,
and they came unto him sorrowing in the High House of his chiefest city,
which hight Meadhamstead. So he bade them sit down nigh unto his bed,
and took up the word and spake:

"Masters, and my good lords, ye may see clearly that a sundering is at
hand, and that I must needs make a long journey, whence I shall come
back never; now I would, and am verily of duty bound thereto, that I
leave behind me some good order in the land. Furthermore, I would that
my daughter, when she is of age thereto, should be Queen in Meadham, and
rule the land; neither will it be many years before she shall be of ripe
age for ruling, if ever she may be; and I deem not that there shall be
any lack in her, whereas her mother could all courtesy, and was as wise
as a woman may be. But how say ye, my masters?"

So they all with one consent said Yea, and they would ask for no better
king than their lady his daughter. Then said the King:

"Hearken carefully, for my time is short: Yet is she young and a maiden,
though she be wise. Now therefore do I need some man well looked to of
the folk, who shall rule the land in her name till she be of eighteen
winters, and who shall be her good friend and counsellor into all wisdom
thereafter. Which of you, my masters, is meet for this matter?"

Then they all looked one on the other, and spake not. And the King said:
"Speak, some one of you, without fear; this is no time for tarrying."

Thereon spake an elder, the oldest of them, and said: "Lord, this is
the very truth, that none of us here present are meet for this office:
whereas, among other matters, we be all unmeet for battle; some of us
have never been warriors, and other some are past the age for leading an
host. To say the sooth, King, there is but one man in Meadham who may do
what thou wilt, and not fail; both for his wisdom, and his might afield,
and the account which is had of him amongst the people; and that man is
Earl Geoffrey, of the Southern Marches."

"Ye say sooth," quoth the King; "but is he down in the South, or nigher
to hand?"

Said the elder: "He is as now in Meadhamstead, and may be in this
chamber in scant half an hour." So the King bade send for him, and there
was silence in the chamber till he came in, clad in a scarlet kirtle and
a white cloak, and with his sword by his side. He was a tall man,
bigly made; somewhat pale of face, black and curly of hair; blue-eyed,
thin-lipped, and hook-nosed as an eagle; a man warrior-like, and
somewhat fierce of aspect. He knelt down by the King's bedside, and
asked him in a sorrowful voice what he would, and the King said: "I ask
a great matter of thee, and all these my wise men, and I myself,
withal, deem that thou canst do it, and thou alone--nay, hearken: I am
departing, and I would have thee hold my place, and do unto my people
even what I would do if I myself were living; and to my daughter as
nigh to that as may be. I say all this thou mayst do, if thou wilt be as
trusty and leal to me after I am dead, as thou hast seemed to all men's
eyes to have been while I was living. What sayest thou?"

The Earl had hidden his face in the coverlet of the bed while the King
was speaking; but now he lifted up his face, weeping, and said: "Kinsman
and friend and King; this is nought hard to do; but if it were, yet
would I do it."

"It is well," said the King: "my heart fails me and my voice; so give
heed, and set thine ear close to my mouth: hearken, belike my daughter
Goldilind shall be one of the fairest of women; I bid thee wed her to
the fairest of men and the strongest, and to none other."

Thereat his voice failed him indeed, and he lay still; but he died not,
till presently the priest came to him, and, as he might, houselled him:
then he departed.

As for Earl Geoffrey, when the King was buried, and the homages done to
the maiden Goldilind, he did no worse than those wise men deemed of him,
but bestirred him, and looked full sagely into all the matters of the
kingdom, and did so well therein that all men praised his rule perforce,
whether they loved him or not; and sooth to say he was not much beloved.




CHAPTER IV. OF THE MAIDEN GOLDILIND.


AMIDST of all his other business Earl Geoffrey bethought him in a while
of the dead King's daughter, and he gave her in charge to a gentlewoman,
somewhat stricken in years, a widow of high lineage, but not over
wealthy. She dwelt in her own house in a fair valley some twenty miles
from Meadhamstead: thereabode Goldilind till a year and a half was worn,
and had due observance, but little love, and not much kindness from
the said gentlewoman, who hight Dame Elinor Leashowe. Howbeit, time
and again came knights and ladies and lords to see the little lady, and
kissed her hand and did obeisance to her; yet more came to her in the
first three months of her sojourn at Leashowe than the second, and more
in the second than the third.

At last, on a day when the said year and a half was fully worn, thither
came Earl Geoffrey with a company of knights and men-at-arms, and he did
obeisance, as due was, to his master's daughter, and then spake awhile
privily with Dame Elinor; and thereafter they went into the hall, he,
and she, and Goldilind, and there before all men he spake aloud and
said:

"My Lady Goldilind, meseemeth ye dwell here all too straitly; for
neither is this house of Leashowe great enough for thy state, and the
entertainment of the knights and lords who shall have will to seek to
thee hither; nor is the wealth of thy liege dame and governante as great
as it should be, and as thou, meseemeth, wouldst have it. Wherefore I
have been considering thy desires herein, and if thou deem it meet to
give a gift to Dame Elinor, and live queenlier thyself than now thou
dost, then mayst thou give unto her the Castle of Greenharbour, and the
six manors appertaining thereto, and withal the rights of wild-wood and
fen and fell that lie thereabout. Also, if thou wilt, thou mayst honour
the said castle with abiding there awhile at thy pleasure; and I shall
see to it that thou have due meney to go with thee thither. How sayest
thou, my lady?"

Amongst that company there were two or three who looked at each other
and half smiled; and two or three looked on the maiden, who was
goodly as of her years, as if with compassion; but the more part kept
countenance in full courtly wise.

Then spake Goldilind in a quavering voice (for she was afraid and wise),
and she said: "Cousin and Earl, we will that all this be done; and it
likes me well to eke the wealth of this lady and my good friend Dame
Elinor."

Quoth Earl Geoffrey: "Kneel before thy lady, Dame, and put thine hands
between hers and thank her for the gift." So Dame Elinor knelt down, and
did homage and obeisance for her new land; and Goldilind raised her
up and kissed her, and bade her sit down beside her, and spake to her
kindly; and all men praised the maiden for her gentle and courteous
ways; and Dame Elinor smiled upon her and them, what she could.

She was small of body and sleek; but her cheeks somewhat flagging; brown
eyes she had, long, half opened; thin lips, and chin somewhat falling
away from her mouth; hard on fifty winters had she seen; yet there have
been those who were older and goodlier both.




CHAPTER V. GOLDILIND COMES TO GREENHARBOUR.


But a little while tarried the Earl Geoffrey at Leashowe, but departed
next morning and came to Meadhamstead. A month thereafter came folk from
him to Leashowe, to wit, the new meney for the new abode of Goldilind;
amongst whom was a goodly band of men-at-arms, led by an old lord
pinched and peevish of face, who kneeled to Goldilind as the new
burgreve of Greenharbour; and a chaplain, a black canon, young,
broad-cheeked and fresh-looking, but hard-faced and unlovely; three
new damsels withal were come for the young Queen, not young maids, but
stalworth women, well-grown, and two of them hard-featured; the third,
tall, black-haired, and a goodly-fashioned body.

Now when these were come, who were all under the rule of Dame Elinor,
there was no gainsaying the departure to the new home; and in two days'
time they went their ways from Leashowe. But though Goldilind was young,
she was wise, and her heart misgave her, when she was amidst this new
meney, that she was not riding toward glory and honour, and a world of
worship and friends beloved. Howbeit, whatso might lie before her, she
put a good face upon it, and did to those about her queenly and with all
courtesy.

Five days they rode from Leashowe north away, by thorpe and town and
mead and river, till the land became little peopled, and the sixth day
they rode the wild-wood ways, where was no folk, save now and again the
little cot of some forester or collier; but the seventh day, about
noon, they came into a clearing of the wood, a rugged little plain of
lea-land, mingled with marish, with a little deal of acre-land in barley
and rye, round about a score of poor frame-houses set down scattermeal
about the lea. But on a long ridge, at the northern end of the said
plain, was a grey castle, strong, and with big and high towers, yet
not so much greater than was Leashowe, deemed Goldilind, as for a
dwelling-house.

Howbeit, they entered the said castle, and within, as without, it was
somewhat grim, though nought was lacking of plenishing due for folk
knightly. Long it were to tell of its walls and baileys and chambers;
but let this suffice, that on the north side, toward the thick forest,
was a garden of green-sward and flowers and potherbs; and a garth-wall
of grey stone, not very high, was the only defence thereof toward the
wood, but it was overlooked by a tall tower of the great wall, which
hight the Foresters' Tower. In the said outer garth-wall also was a
postern, whereby there was not seldom coming in and going out.

Now when Goldilind had been in her chamber for a few days, she found out
for certain, what she had before misdoubted, that she had been brought
from Leashowe and the peopled parts near to Meadhamstead unto the
uttermost parts of the realm to be kept in prison there.

Howbeit, it was in a way prison courteous; she was still served with
observance, and bowed before, and called my lady and queen, and so
forth: also she might go from chamber to hall and chapel, to and fro,
yet scarce alone; and into the garden she might go, yet not for the more
part unaccompanied; and even at whiles she went out a-gates, but then
ever with folk on the right hand and the left. Forsooth, whiles and
again, within the next two years of her abode at Greenharbour, out of
gates she went and alone; but that was as the prisoner who strives to be
free (although she had, forsooth, no thought or hope of escape), and as
the prisoner brought back was she chastised when she came within gates
again.

Everywhere, to be short, within and about the Castle of Greenharbour,
did Goldilind meet the will and the tyranny of the little sleek widow,
Dame Elinor, to whom both carle and quean in that corner of the world
were but as servants and slaves to do her will; and the said Elinor, who
at first was but spiteful in word and look toward her lady, waxed worse
as time wore and as the blossom of the King's daughter's womanhood began
to unfold, till at last the she-jailer had scarce feasted any day
when she had not in some wise grieved and tormented her prisoner; and
whatever she did, none had might to say her nay.

But Goldilind took all with a high heart, and her courage grew with
her years, nor would she bow the head before any grief, but took to her
whatsoever solace might come to her; as the pleasure of the sun and the
wind, and the beholding of the greenery of the wood, and the fowl and
the beasts playing, which oft she saw afar, and whiles anear, though
whiles, forsooth, she saw nought of it all, whereas she was shut up
betwixt four walls, and that not of her chamber, but of some bare and
foul prison of the Castle, which, with other griefs, must she needs
thole under the name and guise of penance.

However, she waxed so exceeding fair and sweet and lovely, that the
loveliness of her pierced to the hearts of many of her jailers, so that
some of them, and specially of the squires and men-at-arms, would do her
some easement which they might do unrebuked, or not sorely rebuked;
as bringing her flowers in the spring, or whiles a singing-bird or a
squirrel; and an old man there was of the men-at-arms, who would ask
leave, and get it at whiles, to come to her in her chamber, or the
garden? and tell her minstrel tales and the like for her joyance. Sooth
to say, even the pinched heart of the old Burgreve was somewhat touched
by her; and he alone had any might to stand between her and Dame Elinor;
so that but for him it had gone much harder with her than it did.

For the rest, none entered the Castle from the world without, nay not so
much as a travelling monk, or a friar on his wanderings, save and except
some messenger of Earl Geoffrey who had errand with Dame Elinor or the
Burgreve.

So wore the days and the seasons, till it was now more than four years
since she had left Leashowe, and her eighteenth summer was beginning.

But now the tale leaves telling of Goldilind, and goes back to
the matters of Oakenrealm, and therein to what has to do with King
Christopher and Rolf the Marshal.




CHAPTER VI. HOW ROLF THE MARSHAL DREAMS A DREAM AND COMES TO THE CASTLE
OF THE UTTERMOST MARCH.


Now this same summer, when King Christopher was of twenty years and
two, Rolf the Marshal, sleeping one noontide in the King's garden at
Oakenham, dreamed a dream. For himseemed that there came through the
garth-gate a woman fair and tall, and clad in nought but oaken-leaves,
who led by the hand an exceeding goodly young man of twenty summers, and
his visage like to the last battle-dead King of Oakenrealm when he was a
young man. And the said woman led the swain up to the Marshal, who asked
in his mind what these two were: and the woman answered his thought and
said: "I am the Woman of the Woods, and the Landwight of Oakenrealm; and
this lovely lad whose hand I hold is my King and thy King and the King
of Oakenrealm. Wake, fool--wake! and look to it what thou wilt do!"

And therewith he woke up crying out, and drew forth his sword. But when
he was fully awakened, he was ashamed, and went into the hall, and sat
in his high-seat, and strove to think out of his troubled mind; but for
all he might do, he fell asleep again; and again in the hall he dreamed
as he had dreamed in the garden: and when he awoke from his dream he had
no thought in his head but how he might the speediest come to the house
of Lord Richard the Lean, and look to the matter of his lord's son and
see him with his eyes, and, if it might be, take some measure with the
threat which lay in the lad's life. Nought he tarried, but set off in an
hour's time with no more company than four men-at-arms and an old squire
of his, who was wont to do his bidding without question, whether it were
good or evil.

So they went by frith and fell, by wood and fair ways, till in two days'
time they were come by undern within sight of the Castle of the Outer
March, and entered into the street of the thorpe aforesaid; and they saw
that there were no folk therein and at the house-doors save old carles
and carlines scarce wayworthy, and little children who might not go
afoot. But from the field anigh the thorpe came the sound of shouting
and glad voices, and through the lanes of the houses they saw on the
field many people in gay raiment going to and fro, as though there were
games and sports toward.

Thereof Lord Rolf heeded nought, but went his ways straight to the
Castle, and was brought with all honour into the hall, and thither came
Lord Richard the Lean, hastening and half afeard, and did obeisance to
him; and there were but a few in the hall, and they stood out of earshot
of the two lords.

The Marshal spoke graciously to Lord Richard, and made him sit beside
him, and said in a soft voice: "We have come to see thee, Lord, and how
the folk do in the Uttermost Marches. Also we would wot how it goes with
a lad whom we sent to thee when he was yet a babe, whereas he was some
byblow of the late King, our lord and master, and we deemed thee
both rich enough and kind enough to breed him into thriving without
increasing pride upon him: and, firstly, is the lad yet alive?"

He knitted his brow as he spake, for carefulness of soul; but Lord
Richard smiled upon him, though as one somewhat troubled, and answered:
"Lord Marshal, I thank thee for visiting this poor house; and I shall
tell thee first that the lad lives, and hath thriven marvellously,
though he be somewhat unruly, and will abide no correction now these
last six years. Sooth to say, there is now no story of his being anywise
akin to our late Lord King; though true it is that the folk in this
faraway corner of the land call him King Christopher, but only in a
manner of jesting. But it is no jest wherein they say that they will
gainsay him nought, and that especially the young women. Yet I will say
of him that he is wise, and asketh not overmuch; the more is the sorrow
of many of the maidens. A fell woodsman he is, and exceeding stark, and
as yet heedeth more of valiance than of the love of woman."

The Marshal looked no less troubled than before at these words; he said:
"I would see this young man speedily."

"So shall it be, Lord," said Lord Richard. Therewith he called to him
a squire, and said: "Go thou down into the thorpe, and bring hither
Christopher, for that a great lord is here who would set him to do a
deed of woodcraft, such as is more than the wont of men."

So the squire went his ways, and was gone a little while, and meantime
drew nigh to the hall a sound of triumphing songs and shouts, and right
up to the hall doors; then entered the squire, and by his side came a
tall young man, clad but in a white linen shirt and deerskin brogues,
his head crowned with a garland of flowers: him the squire brought up to
the lords on the dais, and louted to them, and said: "My lords, I bring
you Christopher, and he not overwilling, for now hath he been but just
crowned king of the games down yonder; but when the carles and queans
there said that they would come with him and bear him company to the
hall doors, then, forsooth, he yea-said the coming. It were not unmeet
that some shame were done him."

"Peace, man!" said Lord Richard, "what hath this to do with thee? Seest
thou not the Lord Marshal here?" The Lord Rolf sat and gazed on the lad,
and scowled on him; but Christopher saw therein nought but the face of
a great lord burdened with many cares; so when he had made his obeisance
he stood up fearlessly and merrily before them.

Sooth to say, he was full fair to look on: for all his strength, which,
as ye shall hear, was mighty, all the fashion of his limbs and his body
was light and clean done, and beauteous; and though his skin, where it
showed naked, was all tanned with the summer, it was fine and sleek and
kindly, every deal thereof: bright-eyed and round-cheeked he was, with
full lips and carven chin, and his hair golden brown of hue, and curling
crisp about the blossoms of his garland.

So must we say that he was such an youngling as most might have been in
the world, had not man's malice been, and the mischief of grudging and
the marring of grasping.

But now spake Lord Rolf: "Sir varlet, they tell me that thou art a
mighty hunter, and of mickle guile in woodcraft; wilt thou then hunt
somewhat for me, and bring me home a catch seldom seen?"

"Yea, Lord King," said Christopher, "I will at least do my best, if thou
but tell me where to seek the quarry and when."

"It is well," said the Marshal, "and to-morrow my squire, whom thou
seest yonder, and who hight Simon, shall tell thee where the hunt is up,
and thou shalt go with him. But hearken! thou shalt not call me king;
for to-day there is no king in Oakenrealm, and I am but Marshal, and
Earl of the king that shall be."

The lad fell a-musing for a minute, and then he said: "Yea, Lord
Marshal, I shall do thy will: but meseemeth I have heard some tale of
one who was but of late king in Oakenrealm: is it not so, Lord?"

"Stint thy talk, young man," cried the Marshal in a harsh voice, "and
abide to-morrow; who knoweth who shall be king, and whether thou or I
shall live to see him."

But as he spake the words they seemed to his heart like a foretelling
of evil, and he turned pale and trembled, and said to Christopher: "Come
hither, lad; I will give thee a gift, and then shalt thou depart till
to-morrow." So Christopher drew near to him, and the Marshal pulled off
a ring from his finger and set it on the lad's, and said to him: "Now
depart in peace;" and Christopher bent the knee to him and thanked him
for the gracious gift of the ruler of Oakenrealm, and then went his ways
out of the hall, and the folk without gave a glad cry as he came amongst
them.

But by then he was come to the door, Lord Rolf looked on his hand, and
saw that, instead of giving the youngling a finger-ring which he had
bought of a merchant for a price of five bezants, as he had meant to
do, he had given him a ring which the old King had had, whereon was the
first letter of his name (Christopher to wit), and a device of a crowned
rose, for this ring was a signet of his. Wherefore was the Marshal once
more sore troubled, and he arose, and was half minded to run down the
hall after Christopher; but he refrained him, and presently smiled
to himself, and then fell a-talking to Lord Richard, sweetly and
pleasantly.

SO wore the day to evening; but, ere he went to bed, the Lord Rolf had
a privy talk, first with Lord Richard, and after with his squire Simon.
What followed of that talk ye may hear after.




CHAPTER VII. HOW CHRISTOPHER WENT A JOURNEY INTO THE WILD-WOOD.


Next morning Christopher, who slept in the little hall of the inner
court of the Castle, arose betimes, and came to the great gate; but, for
as early as he was, there he saw the squire Simon abiding him, standing
between two strong horses; to him he gave the sele of the day, and the
squire greeted him, but in somewhat surly wise. Then he said to him:
"Well, King Christopher, art thou ready for the road?"

"Yea, as thou seest," said the youngling smiling. For, indeed, he had
breeches now beneath his shirt, and a surcoat of green woollen over it;
boots of deerskin had he withal, and spurs thereon: he was girt with a
short sword, and had a quiver of arrows at his back, and bare a great
bow in his hand.

"Yea," quoth Simon, "thou deemest thee a gay swain belike; but thou
lookest likelier for a deerstealer than a rider, thou, hung up to thy
shooting-gear. Deemest thou we go a-hunting of the hind?"

Quoth Christopher: "I wot not, squire; but the great lord who lieth
sleeping yonder, hath told me that thou shouldest give me his errand;
and of some hunting or feat of wood-craft he spake. Moreover, this
crooked stick can drive a shaft through matters harder than a hind's
side."

Simon looked confused, and he reddened and stammered somewhat as he
answered: "Ah, yea: so it was; I mind me; I will tell thee anon."

Said Christopher: "Withal, squire, if we are wending into the wood, as
needs we must, unless we ride round about this dale in a ring all day,
dost thou deem we shall go at a gallop many a mile? Nay, fair sir; the
horses shall wend a foot's pace oftenest, and we shall go a-foot not
unseldom through the thickets."

Now was Simon come to himself again, and that self was surly, so he
said: "Ay, ay, little King, thou deemest thee exceeding wise in these
woods, dost thou not? and forsooth, thou mayst be. Yet have I tidings
for thee."

"Yea, and what be they?" said Christopher.

Simon grinned: "Even these," said he, "that Dr. Knowall was no man's
cousin while he lived, and that he died last week."

Therewith he swung himself into his saddle, and Christopher laughed
merrily at his poor gibe and mounted in like wise.

Wherewithal they rode their ways through the thorpe, and at the southern
end thereof Simon drew rein, and looked on Christopher as if he would
ask him something, but asked not. Then said Christopher: "Whither go we
now?"

Said Simon: "It is partly for thee to say: hearken, I am bidden first to
ride the Redwater Wood with thee: knowest thou that?"

"Yea," said the lad, "full well: but which way shall we ride it? Wilt
thou come out of it at Redwater Head, or Herne Moss, or the Long Pools?"

Said Simon: "We shall make for the Long Pools, if thou canst bring me
there."

Christopher laughed: "Aha!" said he, "then am I some faraway cousin
of Dr. Knowall when the whole tale is told: forsooth I can lead thee
thither; but tell me, what shall I do of valiant deeds at the Long
Pools? for there is no fire-drake nor effit, nay, nor no giant, nor
guileful dwarf, nought save mallard and coot, heron and bittern; yea,
and ague-shivers to boot."

Simon looked sourly on him and said: "Thou are bidden to go with me,
young man, or gainsay the Marshal. Art thou mighty enough thereto? For
the rest, fear not but that the deed shall come to thee one day."

"Nay," said Christopher, "it is all one to me, for I am at home in these
woods and wastes, I and my shafts. Tell me of the deeds when thou
wilt." But indeed he longed to know the deed, and fretted him because of
Simon's surliness and closeness. Then he said: "Well, Squire Simon, let
us to the road; for thou shalt know that to-night we must needs house us
under the naked heaven; in nowise can we come to the Long Pools before
to-morrow morning."

"Yea, and why not?" said the squire; "I have lain in worse places."

"Wilt thou tell me thereof?" said Christopher.

"Mayhappen," said Simon, "if to-morrow comes and goes for both of us
twain."

So they rode their ways through the wood, and baited at midday with what
Simon bare in his saddle-bags, and then went on till night fell on them;
then asked Simon how long they were from the Long Pools, and Christopher
told him that they were yet short of them some fifteen miles, and those
long ones, because of the marish grounds. So they tethered their horses
there and ate their supper; and lay down to sleep in the house of the
woods, by a fire-side which they lighted.

But in the midnight Christopher, who was exceeding fine-eared, had an
inkling of someone moving afoot anigh him, and he awoke therewith, and
sprang up, his drawn short-sword in his hand, and found himself face to
face with Simon, and he also with his sword drawn. Simon sprang aback,
but held up his sword-point, and Christopher, not yet fully awake, cried
out: "What wouldst thou? What is it?"

Simon answered, stammering and all abashed: "Didst thou not hear then?
it wakened me."

"I heard nought," said Christopher; "what was it?"

"Horses going in the wood," said Simon

"Ah, yea," said Christopher, "it will have been the wild colts and the
mares; they harbour about these marsh-land parts. Go to sleep again,
neighbour, the night is not yet half worn; but I will watch a while."

Then Simon sheathed his sword, and turned about and stood uneasily a
little while, and then cast him down as one who would sleep hastily;
but slept not forsooth, though he presently made semblance of it: as for
Christopher, he drew together the brands of the fire, and sat beside it
with his blade over his knees, until the first beginning of the summer
dawn was in the sky; then he began to nod, and presently lay aback and
slept soundly. Simon slept not, but durst not move. So they lay till it
was broad day, and the sunbeams came thrusting through the boughs of the
thicket.




CHAPTER VIII. CHRISTOPHER COMES TO THE TOFTS.


When they arose in the sunshine, Simon went straightway to see to the
horses, while Christopher stayed by the fire to dight their victuals;
he was merry enough, and sang to himself the while; but when Simon came
back again, Christopher looked on him sharply, but for a while Simon
would not meet his eye, though he asked divers questions of him
concerning little matters, as though he were fain to hear Christopher's
voice; at last he raised his eyes, and looked on him steadily, and then
Christopher said: "Well, wayfarer mine, and whither away this morning?"

Said Simon: "As thou wottest, to the Long Pools."

Said the lad: "Well, thou keepest thy tidings so close, that I will ask
thee no more till we come to the Long Pools; since there, forsooth,
thou must needs tell me; unless we sunder company there, whereof I were
nought grieving."

"Mayhappen thou shalt fare a long way to-day," muttered Simon.

But the lad cried out aloud, while his eye glittered and his cheek
flushed: "Belike thou hadst well-nigh opened the door thereto last
night!" And therewith he leapt to his feet and drew his short-sword, and
with three deft strokes sheared asunder an overhanging beech-bough as
thick as a man's wrist, that it fell crashing down, and caught Simon
amongst the fall of its leafy twigs, while Christopher stood laughing
on him, but with a dangerous lofty look in his eyes: then he turned away
quietly toward the horses and mounted his nag, and Simon followed and
did the like, silently; crestfallen he looked, with brooding fierceness
in his face.

So they rode their ways, and spake but little each to each till they
came to where the trees of the wood thinned speedily, and gave out at
last at the foot of a low stony slope but little grassed; and when they
had ridden up to the brow and could see below, Christopher stretched
out his hand, and said: "Lo thou the Long Pools, fellow wayfarer! and lo
some of the tramping; horses that woke thee and not me last night."

Forsooth there lay below them a great stretch of grass, which whiles
ran into mere quagmire, and whiles was sound and better grassed; and
the said plain was seamed by three long shallow pools, with, as it were,
grassy causeways between them, grown over here and there with ancient
alder trees; but the stony slope whereon they had reined up bent round
the plain mostly to the east, as though it were the shore of a great
water; and far away to the south the hills of the forest rose up blue,
and not so low at the most, but that they were somewhat higher than
the crest of the White Horse as ye may see it from the little Berkshire
hills above the Thames. Down on the firm greensward there was indeed a
herd of wild horses feeding; mallard and coot swam about the waters; the
whimbrel laughed from the bent-sides, and three herons stood on the side
of the causeway seeking a good fishing-stead.

Simon sat a-horseback looking askance from the marish to Christopher,
and said nothing a while; then he spake in a low croaking voice, and
said: "So, little King, we have come to the Long Pools; now I will ask
thee, hast thou been further southward than this marish land?"

"That have I," said the lad, "a day's journey further; but according to
the tales of men it was at the peril of my life."

Simon seemed as if he had not noted his last word; he said: "Well then,
since thou knowest the wild and the wood, knowest thou amidst of the
thickets there, two lumps of bare hills, like bowls turned bottom up,
that rise above the trees, and on each a tower, and betwixt them a long
house."

"Save us, Allhallows!" quoth Christopher, "but thou wilt mean the Tofts!
Is it so, sir squire?"

"Even so," said Simon.

"And thou knowest what dwellest there, and wouldst have me lead thee
thither?" said the lad.

"I am so bidden," said Simon; "if thou wilt not do my bidding, seek thou
some place to hide thee in from the hand of the Earl Marshal."

Said the youngling: "Knowest thou not Jack of the Tofts and his seven
sons, and what he is, and that he dwelleth there?"

Said Simon: "I know of him; yea, and himself I know, and that he
dwelleth there; and I wot that men call him an outlaw, and that many
rich men shall lack ere he lacks. What then?"

"This," said Christopher, "that, as all tales tell, he will take my life
if I ride thither. And," said he, turning to Simon, "this is belike what
thou wouldest with me?" And therewith he drew out his sword, for his bow
was unstrung.

But Simon sat still and let his sword abide, and said, sourly enough:
"Thou art a fool to think I am training thee to thy death by him; for I
have no will to die, and why shall he not slay me also? Now again I say
unto thee, thou hast the choice, either to lead me to the Tofts, where
shall be the deed for thee to do, or to hide thee in some hole, as I
said afore, from the vengeance of the Lord of Oakenrealm. But as for thy
sword, thou mayst put it up, for I will not fight with thee, but rather
let thee go with a string to thy leg, if thou wilt not be wise and do as
thy lords ordain for thee."

Christopher sheathed his sword, and a smile came into his face, as if
some new thought were stirring in him, and he said: "Well, since thou
wilt not fight with me, and I but a lad, I will e'en do thy will and
thine errand to Jack of the Tofts. Maybe he is not so black as he is
painted, and not all tales told of him are true. But some of them I will
tell thee as we ride along."

"And some thereof I know already, O woodland knight," said Simon,
as they rode down the bent, and Christopher led on toward the green
causeway betwixt the waters. "Tell me," quoth he, when they had ridden
awhile, "is this one of thy tales, how Jack of the Tofts went to the
Yule feast of a great baron in the guise of a minstrel, and, even as
they bore in the boar's head, smote the said baron on the neck, so that
his head lay by the head of the swine on the Christmas board?"

"Yea," said Christopher, "and how Jack cried out: 'Two heads of swine,
one good to eat, one good to burn.' But, my master, thou shalt know that
this manslaying was not for nought: whereas the Baron of Greenlake had
erewhile slain Jack's father in felon wise, where he could strike no
stroke for life; and two of his brethren also had he slain, and made the
said Jack an outlaw, and he all sackless. In the Uttermost March we deem
that he had a case against the baron."

"Hah!" said Simon. "Is this next tale true, that this Jack o' the Tofts
slew a good knight before the altar, so that the priest's mass-hackle
was all wet with his blood, whereas the said priest was in the act of
putting the holy body into the open mouth of the said knight?"

Christopher said eagerly: "True was it, by the Rood! and well was it
done, for that same Sir Raoul was an ugly traitor, who had knelt down
where he died to wed the Body of the Lord to a foul lie in his mouth;
whereas the man who knelt beside him he had trained to his destruction,
and was even then doing the first deal of his treason by forswearing him
there."

"And that man who knelt with him there," said Simon, "what betid to
him?"

Said Christopher: "He went out of the church with Jack of the Tofts that
minute of the stroke; and to the Tofts he went with him, and abode with
him freely: and a valiant man he was...and is."

"Hah!" said Simon again. "And then there is this: that the seven sons
of Jack of the Tofts bore off perforce four fair maidens of gentle blood
from the castle wherein they dwelt, serving a high dame in all honour;
and that moreover, they hanged the said dame over the battlements of her
own castle. Is this true, fair sir?"

"True is it as the gospel," said Christopher: "yet many say that the
hanged dame had somewhat less than her deserts; for a foul & cruel whore
had she been; and had done many to be done to death, and stood by while
they were pined. And the like had she done with those four damsels, had
there not been the stout sons of Jack of the Tofts; so that the dear
maidens were somewhat more than willing to be borne away."

Simon grinned: "Well, lad," said he, "I see that thou knowest Jack of
the Tofts even better than I do; so why in the devil's name thou art
loth to lead me to him, I wot not."

Christopher reddened, and held his peace awhile; then he said: "Well
fellow-farer, at least I shall know something of him ere next midnight."

"Yea," said Simon, "and shall we not come to the Tofts before
nightfall?"

"Let us essay it," said Christopher, "and do our best, it yet lacketh
three hours of noon." Therewith he spurred on, for the greensward was
hard under the hooves, and they had yet some way to go before they
should come amongst the trees and thickets.

Into the said wood they came, and rode all day diligently, but night
fell on them before they saw either house or man or devil; then said
Simon: "Why should we go any further before dawn? Will it not be best to
come to this perilous house by daylight?"

Said Christopher: "There be perils in the wood as well as in the house.
If we lie down here, maybe Jack's folk may come upon us sleeping, and
some mischance may befall us. Withal, hereabout be no wild horses to
wake thee and warn thee of thy foeman anigh. Let us press on; there is
a moon, though she be somewhat hidden by clouds, and meseemeth the way
lieth clear before me; neither are we a great way from the Tofts."

Then Simon rode close up to Christopher, and took his rein and stayed
him, and said to him, as one who prayeth: "Young man, willest thou my
death?"

"That is as it may be," said Christopher; "willest thou mine?"

Simon held his peace awhile, and Christopher might not see what was in
his face amidst the gathering dusk; but he twitched his rein out of the
squire's hand, as if he would hasten onward; then the squire said: "Nay,
I pray thee abide and hear a word of me."

"Speak then," said Christopher, "but hasten, for I hunger, and I would
we were in the hall." And therewith he laughed.

Said Simon: "Thus it is: if I go back to my lord and bear no token of
having done his errand to Jack of the Tofts, then am I in evil case; and
if I come to the Tofts, I wot well that Jack is a man fierce of heart,
and ready of hand: now, therefore, I pray thee give me thy word to be my
warrant, so far as thou mayst be, with this woodman and his sons."

At that word Christopher brake out a-laughing loudly, till all the dusk
wood rang with the merry sound of his fresh voice; at last he said:
"Well, well, thou art but a craven to be a secret murderer: the Lord God
would have had an easy bargain of Cain, had he been such as thou. Come
on, and do thine errand to Jack of the Tofts, and I will hold thee
harmless, so far as I may. Though, sooth to say, I guessed what thine
errand was, after the horses waked thee and put a naked sword in thine
hand last night. Marry! I had no inkling of it when we left the Castle
yesterday morning, but deemed thy lord needed me to do him some service.
Come on then! or rather go thou on before me a pace; there, where thou
seest the glimmer betwixt the beech-trees yonder; if thou goest astray,
I am anigh thee for a guide. And I say that we shall not go far without
tidings."

Simon went on perforce, as he was bidden, and they rode thus a while
slowly, Christopher now and then crying, as they went: "To the right,
squire! To the left! Straight on now!" and so on. But suddenly they
heard voices, and it was as if the wood had all burst out into fire, so
bright a light shone out. Christopher shouted, and hastened on to pass
Simon, going quite close to his right side thereby, and as he did so, he
saw steel flashing in his hand, and turned sidling to guard him, but
ere he could do aught Simon drave a broad dagger into his side, and then
turned about and fled the way they had come, so far as he knew how.

Christopher fell from his horse at once as the stroke came home, but
straightway therewith were there men with torches round about him, a
dozen of them; men tall and wild-looking in the firelight; and one
of them, a slim young man with long red hair falling all about his
shoulders, knelt down by him, while the others held his horse and gat
his feet out of the stirrups.

The red-head laid his hand on his breast, and raised his head up till
the light of a torch fell on it, and then he cried out: "Masters, here
hath been a felon; the man hath been sticked, and the deed hath to do
with us; for lo you, this is none other than little Christopher of the
Uttermost March, who stumbled on the Tofts last Yule, and with whom we
were so merry together. Here, thou Robert of Maisey, do thy leechdom on
him if he be yet living; but if he be dead, or dieth of his hurt, then
do I take the feud on me, to follow it to the utmost against the slayer;
even I, David the Red, though I be the youngest of the sons of Jack of
the Tofts. For this man I meant should be my fellow in field and fell,
ganging and galloping, in hall and high-place, in cot and in choir,
before woman and warrior, and priest and proud-prince. Now thou Robert,
how does he?"

Said the man who had looked to Christopher's wound, and had put aside
his coat and shirt: "He is sore hurt, but meseemeth not deadly. Nay,
belike he may live as long as thou, or longer, whereas thou wilt ever be
shoving thy red head and lank body wheresoever knocks are going."

David rose with a sigh of one who is lightened of a load, and said:
"Well Robert, when thou hast bound his wound let us have him into the
house: Ho lads! there is light enough to cut some boughs and make a
litter for him. But, ho again! has no one gone after the felon to take
him?"

Robert grinned up from his job with the hurt man: "Nay, King David,"
said he, "it is mostly thy business; mayhappen thou wilt lay thy heels
on thy neck and after him."

The red-head stamped on the ground, and half drew his sax, and shoved
it back again unto the sheath, and then said angrily: "I marvel at thee,
Robert, that thou didst not send a man or two at once after the felon:
how may I leave my comrade and sweet board-fellow lying hurt in the
wild-wood? Art thou growing over old for our woodland ways, wherein
loitering bringeth louting?"

Robert chuckled and said: "I thought thou wouldst take the fly in thy
mouth, foster-son: if the felon escape Ralph Longshanks and Anthony
Green, then hath he the devil's luck; and they be after him."

"That is well," said the young man, "though I would I were with them."
And therewith he walked up and down impatiently, while the others were
getting ready the litter of boughs.

At last it was done, and Christopher laid thereon, and they all went
on together through the woodland path, the torches still flaring about
them. Presently they came out into a clearing of the wood, and lo,
looming great and black before them against the sky, where the moon had
now broken out of the clouds somewhat, the masses of the tofts, and at
the top of the northernmost of them a light in the upper window of a
tall square tower. Withal the yellow-litten windows of a long house
showed on the plain below the tofts; but little else of the house might
be seen, save that, as they drew near, the walls brake out in doubtful
light here and there as the torches smote them.

So came they to a deep porch, where they quenched all the torches save
one, and entered a great hall through it, David and two other tall young
men going first, and Robert Maisey going beside the bier. The said hall
was lighted with candles, but not very brightly, save at the upper end;
but amidmost a flickering heap of logs sent a thin line of blue smoke up
to the luffer. There were some sixty folk in the hall, scattered about
the end-long tables, a good few of whom were women, well grown and
comely enough, so far as could be seen under the scanty candle-light.
At the high-table, withal, were sitting both men and women, and as they
drew near to the greater light of it, there could be seen in the chief
seat a man, past middle age, tall, wide-shouldered and thin-flanked,
with a short peaked beard and close-cut grizzled hair; he was high of
cheekbones, thin-faced, with grey eyes, both big and gentle-looking; he
was clad in a green coat welted with gold. Beside him sat a woman, tall
and big-made, but very fair of face, though she were little younger,
belike, than the man. Out from these two sat four men and four women,
man by man and woman by woman, on either side of the high-seat. Of the
said men, one was of long red hair as David, and like to him in
all wise, but older; the others were of like fashion to him in the
high-seat. Shortly to say it, his sons they were, as David and the two
young men with him. The four women who sat with these men were all fair
and young, and one of them, she who drank out of the red-head's cup, so
fair, and with such a pleasant slim grace, that her like were not easy
to be found.

Again, to shorten the tale, there in the hall before Christopher, who
lay unwotting, were Jack of the Tofts and his seven sons, and the four
wives of four of the same, whom they had won from the Wailful Castle,
when they, with their father, put an end to the evil woman, and the
great she-tyrant of the Land betwixt the Wood and the River.

Now when David and his were come up to the dais, they stayed them,
and their father spake from his high-seat and said: "What is to do, ye
three? and what catch have ye?"

Said David: "I would fain hope 'tis the catch of a life that or I love;
for here is come thy guest of last Yule, even little Christopher, who
wrestled with thee and threw thee after thou hadst thrown all of us, and
he lying along and hurt, smitten down by a felon hard on our very doors.
What will ye do with him?"

"What," said Jack of the Tofts, "but tend him and heal him and cherish
him. And when he is well, then we shall see. But where is the felon who
smote him?"

Said David: "He fled away a-horseback ere we came to the field of deed,
and Anthony Green and Ralph Longshanks are gone after him, and belike,
will take him."

"Mayhappen not," said the master. "Now, forsooth, I have an inkling of
what this may mean; whereas there can be but one man whose business
may be the taking of our little guest's life. But let all be till he
be healed and may tell us his tale; and, if he telleth it as I deem
he will, then shall we seek further tidings. Meanwhile, if ye take the
felon, keep him heedfully till I may see him; for then may I have a true
tale out of him, even before Christopher is hale again."

So therewith David and Robert, with two or three others, brought
Christopher to a chamber, and did what leechdoms to him they might;
but Jack of the Tofts, and his sons and their fair wives, and his other
folk, made merry in the hall of the Tofts.




CHAPTER IX. SQUIRE SIMON COMES BACK TO OAKENHAM. THE EARL MARSHAL TAKEN
TO KING IN OAKENREALM.


Now as to Squire Simon, whether the devil helped him, or his luck, or
were it his own cunning and his, horse's stoutness, we wot not; but in
any case he fell not in with Ralph Longshanks and Anthony Green, but
rode as far and as fast as his horse would go, and then lay down in the
wild-wood; and on the morrow arose and went his ways, and came in the
even to the Castle of the Uttermost March, and went on thence the morrow
after on a fresh horse to Oakenham. There he made no delay but went
straight to the High House, and had privy speech of the Earl Marshal;
and him he told how he had smitten Christopher, and, as he deemed, slain
him. The Earl Marshal looked on him grimly and said: "Where is the ring
then?"

"I have it not," said Simon. "How might I light down to take it, when
the seven sons were hard on us?" And therewith he told him all the tale,
and how he had risen to slay Christopher the even before; and how he had
found out after that the youngling had become guest and fosterling of
the folk of the Tofts; and how warily Christopher had ridden, so that
he, Simon, had had to do his best at the last moment. "And now, Lord,"
quoth he, "I see that it will be my luck to have grudging of thee, or
even worse it may be; yea, or thou wilt be presently telling me that
I am a liar and never struck the stroke: but I warrant me that by
this time Jack of the Tofts knoweth better, for I left my knife in the
youngling's breast, and belike he wotteth of my weapons. Well, then, if
thou wilt be quit of me, thou hast but to forbear upholding me against
the Toft folk, and then am I gone without any to-do of thee."

Earl Rolf spake quietly in answer, though his face was somewhat
troubled: "Nay, Simon, I doubt thee not, not one word; for why shouldest
thou lie to me? nor do I deem thou wouldest, for thou art trusty and
worthy. Yet sore I doubt if the child be dead. Well, even so let it be,
for I am alive; and full surely I am mightier than Jack of the Tofts,
both to uphold thee against him (wherein I shall not fail), and
otherwise. But may God make me even as that young man if I be not
mightier yet in a few days. But now do thou go and eat and drink and
take thy disport; for thou hast served me well; and in a little while I
shall make thee knight and lord, and do all I can to pleasure thee."

So then Simon knelt to the Earl and made obeisance to him, and arose and
went his ways, light-hearted and merry.

But within the month it so befel that some of the lords and dukes came
to the Earl Marshal, and prayed him to call together a great Folk-mote
of all Oakenrealm; and he answered them graciously, and behight them to
do as they would; and even so did he.

And that Mote was very great, and whenas it was hallowed, there arose
a great lord, grey and ancient, and bewailed him before the folk, that
they had no king over Oakenrealm to uphold the laws & ward the land; and
"Will ye live bare and kingless for ever?" said he at last. "Will ye
not choose you a king, and crown him, before I die, and we others of the
realm who are old and worn?" Then he sat down, and another arose, and in
plain terms he bade them take the Earl Marshal to king. And then arose
one after other, and each sang the same song, till the hearts of the
people grew warm with the big words, and at first many, and then more
cried out: "A King, a King! The Earl Marshal for King! Earl Rolf for
King!" So that at last the voices rose into a great roar, and sword
clashed on shield, and they who were about the Earl turned to him and
upraised him on a great war-shield, and he stood thereon above the folk
with a naked sword in his hand, and all the folk shouted about him.

Thereafter the chiefs and all the mightiest came and did homage to him
for King of Oakenrealm as he sat on the Hill of the Folk-mote: and that
night there was once more a King of Oakenrealm, and Earl Rolf was no
more, but King Rolf ruled the people.

But now the tale leaves telling of him, and turns again to Christopher
the woodman, who lay sick of his hurt in the House of the Tofts.




CHAPTER X. OF CHRISTOPHER AT THE TOFTS.


Christopher was six weeks ere he could come and go as he was wont; but
it was but a few days ere he was well enough to tell his tale to Jack of
the Tofts and his seven bold sons; and they cherished him and made
much of him, and so especially did David, the youngest son, to his
board-fellow and troth-brother.

On a day when he was well-nigh whole, as he sat under an oak-tree nigh
the house, in the cool of the evening, Jack of the Tofts came to him and
sat beside him, and made him tell his tale to him once more, and when he
was done he said to him: "Foster-son, for so I would have thee deem of
thyself, what is the thing that thou rememberest earliest in thy days?"

Said Christopher: "A cot without the Castle walls at the Uttermost
Marches, and a kind woman therein, big, sandy-haired, and freckled, and
a lad that was white-haired and sturdy, somewhat bigger than I. And
I mind me standing up against the door-post of the cot and seeing
men-at-arms riding by in white armour, and one of them throwing an apple
to me, and I raised my arm to throw it back at him, but my nurse (for
somehow I knew she was not my mother) caught my hand and drew me back
indoors, and I heard the men laughing behind me. And then a little after
my nurse took me into the Castle court, and there was again the man who
had thrown me the apple, sitting on a bench therein, clad in a scarlet
gown furred with brown fur; and she led me up to him, and he stooped
down and chucked me under the chin and put his hand on my head, and
looked at