The Project Gutenberg eBook of Stories from the Old Attic
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

*** This is a COPYRIGHTED Project Gutenberg eBook. Details Below. ***
***     Please follow the copyright guidelines in this file.      ***


Title: Stories from the Old Attic

Author: Robert A. Harris


        
Release date: April 1, 1995 [eBook #240]
                Most recently updated: July 13, 2008

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/240

Credits: Produced by Robert Harris


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK STORIES FROM THE OLD ATTIC ***




Produced by Robert Harris





STORIES FROM THE OLD ATTIC

Robert Harris

1992

Copyright 1992 Robert Harris

Permission is granted to share this book as an electronic text
All other rights, include hardcopy publication, are reserved


To Mom




Contents:

  The Second Greatest Commandment
  A Good Horse and a Better
  It's Nut Valuable
  Stewardship
  The Man Who Believed in Miracles
  A Fish Story
  Man
  Love
  Indecision
  The Limit
  How Sir Reginald Helped the King
  How the Noble Percival Won the Fair Arissa
  Truth Carved in Stone
  How Sir Philo Married a Beautiful Princess Instead of the Woman He Loved
  Serendipity
  A Tale Revealing the Wisdom of Being a Cork on the River of Life
  The Art of Truth
  Matthew 18:3
  The Boy and the Vulture
  Three Flat Tires
  The History of Professor De Laix
  How the Humans Finally Learned to Like Themselves
  The Caterpillar and the Bee
  The Wise One
  On the Heroic Suffering of Mankind
  The Quest
  Life
  Discernment
  It Depends on How You Look at It: Eight Vignettes on Perspective
  The Strange Adventure
  In Defeat There Is Victory
  The Oppressed Girl
  Two Conversations on Direction
  Semiotics Strikes Out
  Seeing is Believing
  A Traditional Story
  The Day Creativity Met the Linear Dragon
  The Wall and the Bridge
  The Wish
  Several One Way Conversations
  How the King Learned about Love
  The Fly and the Elephant
  The Man Who Talked Backwards
  The Clue
  An Analogy




The Second Greatest Commandment

A man was out shoveling the excess gravel off his driveway and
into the graveled road that ran by his house.  A neighbor happened
to be walking by just as the man tossed a shovel full down the road
the opposite way the man used to drive in and out.  "I see you
aren't messing up the part of the road you use," sneered the neighbor.

A few minutes later another neighbor happened by and saw the
man toss a shovel full of gravel down the other part of the road.  "I
see you are fixing only the part of the road you use, and not the
part others must use," sneered the second neighbor.

The shoveler stood still with a shovel full of gravel as the
second man left.  Now unsure of what to do with it that would be
agreeable to his neighbors, he decided simply to dump it out onto
his driveway on the very spot whence he had scooped it up.  Just as
he did so, a third neighbor happened to be walking by.  "I see you
are stealing gravel from the road for your driveway," sneered the
third man.  "People like you are what's wrong with this country."

At this point the homeowner put his shovel away and sat down
with his pipe to contemplate these occurrences.  Pretty soon a
neighbor from further down the street drove by and saw the man
sitting down enjoying his pipe.  "If you weren't so lazy, you'd
shovel some of that gravel off your driveway and back onto the road
where it belongs," the driver sneered as he drove away, spinning his
tires and scattering gravel in every direction.




A Good Horse and a Better

A man once came upon a lad about midday skipping stones across
a pond.  "Hello, young man," he said, approaching.  "What brings you
here on a school day?"

"I wrote a poem yesterday which was the best in class, and the
teacher said I could play today while the other children wrote
more poems."

"Well, then, you are to be congratulated.  Yours is certainly a
deed of distinction.  And as a reward," he added, settling himself
on a tree stump, "let me tell you a story about two horses."

"Oh, yes, do," the youth said eagerly, sitting down at the
man's feet.

"The first horse lived in Arabia, and he was beautiful and
strong.  He had never lost a race.  And he was shrewd.  He would
run just hard enough to pull away from the other horses in the race,
and then he would let up and trot, or even walk, across the finish
line, to the great embarrassment and humiliation of all the
other horses."

"He was clearly a superior animal," the young poet interjected.

"Yes, he was," agreed the man.  "Now the other horse lived in
Macedonia, and he, too, was strong and noble.  He had, however, lost
one race, the first race of his life; and some say he always
remembered that when he ran."

"How grating to the heart it must be to lose so early and have
a blight on one's reputation," mused the young man.

"But this horse always won every other race.  And unlike our
first horse, when this Macedonian horse ran and knew he had beaten
the other horses, instead of letting up he redoubled his efforts and
ran even harder--as hard as he could--for he now ran not against the
fortuitous competitors with whom he began the race, but against his
own heart: against all horses past and all horses future, against
every horse in Macedonia and every one in Arabia, and also against
the ideal horse with a pace so frighteningly fast that few can
conceive its possibility.  And even more than this, he ran toward
the perfection of excellence itself.  And when he crossed the
finish line, as happy as he was to win, he secretly lamented that
his opponents had not been fast enough to threaten him and push
him onward."

"Even though he lost once," the lad remarked after a short
silence, "perhaps this horse was as good as the Arabian."

"Perhaps so, my child," said the man, with a smile.  "Perhaps so."




It's Nut Valuable

Once upon a time a wise and thoughtful craftsman made a new
electric adding machine.  It was very complex with many gears and
levers and wheels, and it did amazing things, always adding up the
numbers correctly.  So the craftsman sold it to a businessman for
many thousands of dollars.  All the parts inside the new adding
machine felt good about being so valuable.  They worked hard and
happily all day, and often talked about how useful they were to
the businessman.

But one day a spring noticed a little nut just sitting on
the end of a shaft.  The spring pulled at the lever he was
attached to and pointed.  Soon the whole works knew.  "You lazy
little nut," said a spinning gear, "why don't you get to work?"

"But I am working," said the nut.  "Holding on is my job."

"That's stupid," yelled a cam.  "I don't believe our maker put
you here.  You just sneaked in to steal some of our glory.  Why don't
you get out?"

"Well," said the nut, "I'm sure our maker knew what he was
doing, and that I do serve a purpose.  I hold on as tightly as I
can." But all the machinery began to squeal and abuse the nut so
violently that he felt very sad and began to doubt himself.
"Maybe I am useless," he thought.  He appealed to the shaft he was
threaded onto.

"Look, kid," the shaft told him, "I've got plenty of other
parts holding on to me.  I shouldn't have to support you, too."

So finally the little nut decided to unscrew himself and go
away.  He dropped off the shaft and fell through a hole in the
bottom of the machine.  "Good riddance," said the motor.

"Yeah, good riddance," all the other parts agreed.

Rather quickly the nut was forgotten and things went on as they
had for awhile.  But in a few hours, the shaft began to feel funny.
At first he began to vibrate.  Then he started sliding and slipping.
He called for help to the other parts attached to him, but they
could do nothing.  Presently the shaft fell completely out of his
mounting hole, causing many levers and gears and cams to slip out
of alignment and crash against each other, and forcing the whole
machine to grind to a halt with an awful noise.  The motor tried
his best to keep things going--he tried so hard that he bent many
of the parts--and then as he tried even harder, he burned himself
out.  "This is all the fault of that little nut," the ruined parts
all agreed.

"I'll give ya three bucks for it," said the junk man to the
office manager.




Stewardship

A wise man approached three young men standing around idly.
"Here is a coin worth a hundred dollars," the wise man said to the
first youth.  "What should I do with it?"

"Give it to me," he said at once.

"Rather than reward such selfishness and greed," responded the
wise man, "it would be better to throw the money into the sea."  And
with this, the wise man threw the coin into the water.  "Now," he
said to the second youth, "here is another coin.  What should I do
with it?"

The second youth, feeling shrewd, answered, "Throw it into the sea."

But the wise man said, "That would be a careless waste.  To
follow a bad example only because it is an example is folly.  Better
than throwing this money away would be to give it to the poor."  And
he gave the money to a beggar sitting nearby.  "I have one last
coin," the wise man went on, talking to the third youth.  "What
shall I do with it?"

The third youth had been paying attention, and, thinking he
would get the money if he avoided the greed and wastefulness implied
in the answers of his friends, said, "Why, give it to the poor."

"That is a very wise and kind answer," said the wise man,
smiling.  And because you have answered so well" (at this the youth
brightened with expectation), "I will indeed take your good advice
and give the money to the poor."

"Don't I get anything for my wisdom?" demanded the youth.

"You have already received something much better than money,"
said the wise man.




The Man Who Believed in Miracles

Once upon a time a traveler arrived in a land quite like our
own, full of modern technology like cars and computers and whistling
teapots, but with these two differences: there were no television
sets and no airplanes.  In fact, nothing at all had ever been seen
in the sky, not even a bird, and the only movies the people ever saw
were in the theaters.

The traveler stayed for about a month on the eastern shore where
he had arrived, and then decided to visit the western cities.  He
mentioned his decision one evening at a meeting of the principal
scientists and educators of the region, who had gathered to hear of
his travels.  Someone mentioned that the west had much to offer, but
that the journey between the two areas was unpleasant, consisting of
crossing a hot, empty desert.  "In that case," said the traveler,
"I'll just fly."

"Is that like sleep?" one of the scientists asked.

"No, no," the traveler replied.  "You know, fly through the air,
like a bird."

"And what is a bird?" someone asked.  And so the traveler began
to explain about flight and what an airplane was and how it flew from
one place to another.  The room became very quiet, and the
expressions on the faces of everyone present darkened.

"Does he expect us to believe this?" one man whispered to another.

"Well, you know what liars travelers are," someone else added.
Finally the host spoke up, slightly embarrassed and slightly indignant.

"If this is your idea of a joke," he began, but was interrupted
by the surprised traveler.

"Why, it's no joke at all.  People fly all the time."

"I am sorry that you so much underestimate the intelligence and
learning of your audience," said a professor across the table.  "That
a person could enter some metal device--like a car with fins--and
rise into the air, and be sustained there, and move forward, why that
clearly violates everything we know about the law of gravity and the
laws of physics.  If we have learned anything from a thousand years
of study of the natural world, it is that an object heavier than air
must return immediately to earth when it is tossed into the sky."

"Hear, hear," two or three people muttered.

"Now, if you perhaps mean that these 'airplanes,' as you call
them, are somehow flung into the air for a short distance and then
fall to the ground, well, then perhaps that would be possible."  The
professor looked expectantly and a bit condescendingly at the
traveler, hoping that the man would take this face-saving opportunity.

"No, no.  You don't understand," said the traveler.  "The
airplanes have powerful motors and the craft rise into the air, and
they stay up as long as they want, as long as the fuel holds out."
There were several audible "hmmphs" around the room.

"Tell us then," said another scholar, in a saccharine voice,
"how this device works.  What makes it fly?"

"Well, I don't know exactly how it works.  It has something to
do with air flowing over the wings."

"You don't know--you cannot explain--how it works, this device
that runs counter to everything we know about the natural world, yet
you believe in it anyway."

"Believe in it?" asked the traveler, a bit confused by this
turn of phrase.  "Of course I 'believe in it.' I fly on one all the
time at home."

"And how do you control its motions?" a man asked, without
removing his pipe.  The audience was clearly beginning to patronize
the traveler, and he was growing a little irritated.

"Oh, I don't control it.  There's a pilot for that."

"I see," the pipe smoker said.  "So this airplane contains both
you and the pilot.  You're telling us that perhaps four or five
hundred pounds of dead weight can travel through the air as long
as it wants."

"As long as the fuel holds out," added one of the hmmphers,
with amusement.

"And all the time sneering at the law of gravity and laughing
science in the face," someone else noted.

"Well, actually, the planes are much larger than that," said
the traveler.  "Many of them hold two or three hundred people and
weigh, my, I don't know--many thousands of pounds."

"I think we have heard enough," the now-fully-embarrassed
and half-angered host said.  "It was amusing for awhile, but it's
time to put an end to this nonsense."

"It is not nonsense," the traveler protested.  "It is the truth."

"Then you really believe this madman's drivel you've been
feeding us?" the host asked, rather hotly.

"Of course.  How can I not believe it?  I see it and live it
every day.  And here," he added, remembering something, "I even
have a photograph."

"Obviously faked," said the host, dismissing it after a glance.

"Who invited this charlatan?" someone asked of no one in particular.

"I thought science had put an end to all this miraculous event
stuff long ago," said another man, rising from his chair and
preparing to leave.

"Well, let's not pursue this pointless discussion," the
host said.  "Our guest apparently knows nothing of science, and
is impervious to logic and to the considered opinion of the best
minds of our nation.  There's nothing left to do but adjourn."
The meeting began to break up, and the traveler was putting on
his coat when the man with the pipe made one last attempt to
reason with him.

"We are all scientists here, all educated men.  All of us
agree that it is impossible for a heavier-than-air device to
fly on its own through the air.  Don't you see that?  This is
against the laws of nature--it violates the law of gravity."

"Well," said the traveler, "perhaps there is another law,
or perhaps there is a higher law than the law of gravity,
which, when it is understood, will explain how planes can fly."

"That's just what I'd expect a religious fanatic to say,"
said a man who had been listening in.  "Science can jump
into the trash as far as you religious types are concerned."

"Not at all," said the traveler.  "But your science is not
perfect.  You do not yet know everything about everything, what
is possible and what is not possible."

"Go take your religion to a church and keep it away from
serious people," the man concluded, stomping out of the room.

In the weeks that followed, the traveler was ridiculed
and denounced in the newspapers, being called everything from a
con artist to a prospective mental patient.  (The scientific
journals said nothing about the man because they considered the
whole matter as beneath serious thought.)  As a result, the
traveler was often left to himself, and so he pulled out his
tiny portable television set and began to watch it.  Just by
chance, some visitors happened to come by and see the little
box.  They were very impressed and urged the traveler to market
his invention for putting a movie inside such a small space.

In a few days, word had spread about this mini-movie and
several scientists were convinced (after some debate) to come see
it, together with some engineers representing the movie projector
manufacturers of the nation.

They were sufficiently impressed as they watched a few scenes,
but when the traveler changed channels, their enthusiasm turned to
gaping astonishment.  The traveler switched all around, showing
them twenty channels in all.  Such was the amazement and even
incredulity of the engineers that they already began to suspect
some kind of trick.  The scientists looked confused.

"You certainly have a lot of films stored in that little
box," one of the engineers said.  "How do you get them all in there?"

"The pictures are not in the box," said the traveler.  "They
are all over in the air around us.  This antenna brings them in
and the set makes them visible."  The engineers laughed while the
scientists sneered, the latter now sorry they had allowed themselves
to be talked into coming to hear this notorious nut.

"Come now," one of the scientists said.  "Do you expect us
to believe that there are pictures floating around us in the
air--pictures we cannot see?  And that twenty sets of these pictures
are all present at once, scrambled together, just waiting for that
little box to take them and sort them out?  What do you take us for
anyway--a bunch of gullible greenhorn fools?"

"And besides," continued an engineer, "how do these pictures
get into the air in the first place?  Where do they come from?"

"They're sent from a satellite in the sky," the traveler
said, as all heads looked up.  "You can't see it, of course.
It's too high.  But it's there."

"And of course you expect us to believe in something we can't
see," said one of the scientists, with a touch of scorn.

"Believe it because of its effects--the results--the
evidence of its existence," the traveler said.  "If it weren't
there, you would see no pictures."

"We know you're lying," another engineer said.  "Even if there
were a device in the sky, held up by a balloon or whatever, it
couldn't send a signal down here without a wire.  That would be
against everything we know about electricity.  And I don't see
any wire."

"Well, it doesn't use a wire," said the traveler.  "The
signals are sent through the air.  And the satellite isn't
held up by a balloon; it stays up because it's high enough
so that gravity doesn't pull it down."

"Now he's denying the law of gravity again," said one of the
scientists.  "Let's go.  I've heard enough.  Whatever he does to
perform his little trick, he isn't telling us about it, so let's
just leave."

"Yeah, let's get out of here," another scientist said.  "Every
time we catch him in an impossibility, he tells us the explanation
is in the sky."  Then turning to the traveler to say goodbye, he
added, "We cannot believe something when the weight of scientific
evidence is against it."

"But when the physical evidence is clearly before you," said
the traveler, "how can you not believe, even if your theories cannot
explain it?"

"Because such an event would be a miracle, and science has
nothing to do with miracles."

"Then perhaps science is the poorer for it," said the
traveler, sitting down to watch his television, which just then
happened to be showing a dove flying silently across the sky.




A Fish Story

The bright sun and the gentle wind had made the little fish
almost bold that summer day, enough so that they were swimming all
over the pond, from their home in the reeds at one end to the rocky
beach at the other.  Or at least they swam very near to the rocky
beach--as near as they dared--for all the older fish constantly
warned them to stay away.  Some of the dangers were clear enough,
such as the wading birds who stepped into the shallow water, hoping
to pluck out a little fish and swallow him right down, and the
foxes, whose gigantic teeth were too awful even to think about.  But
there were other evils that were not so distinct.  Hideous and
unimaginable these were, with tales of fish swimming into the area
and never to be heard from again, vague reports of sudden
disappearances, and some hysterical tales, impossible to make sense
of, of leaping shadows, wild splashings, worms flying through the
water, and such like.

The dangers of the rocky beach could not quite be isolated in
the minds of the little fish, so that they felt a general sense of
impending doom whenever they swam more than a few feet from home.
That is why, one day when three little fish met each other suddenly
among the reeds, they were all momentarily startled.  But soon they
began talking and relaxed a little.  "This is a wonderful pond,"
said one.  "It's so big.  But I've never been this far away from
home before."

"Me either," said another.  "I just hope we're safe here
in these reeds."

"I do too," agreed the third.  "You never know where an enemy
may come from."

"And you can't be too careful," added the first.

"By the way," said one, "my name is Swimmy Fish.  What's yours?"

"Finny Fish," said another.

"I'm Chirpy Bird," said the third.

Swimmy Fish and Finny Fish gave a start, looked at each other
with surprise and terror, and then swam off in opposite directions
as fast as they could.  "Wait!" cried Chirpy Bird.  "What's wrong?
Come back!"  He looked around anxiously, himself frightened by their
fright, though he could see no sign of danger anywhere.  But their
fear hung over the area, so he decided to swim toward home, at more
than his usual speed.

He had not gone very far when he saw several adult fish swimming
toward him with serious and half-frightened expressions on their faces.
When they saw him, they stopped at a distance.  "Stop there," one of
them demanded, so Chirpy Bird stopped.  The big fish seemed to be
engaged in a solemn discussion.  Every once in awhile one of them
waved a fin or glanced in his direction.  Finally, two of the largest
fish approached a little nearer.  "Don't make any sudden moves," the
largest one, whose name was Glubber Fish, said with a mixture of
command and pleading.

"I don't understand," the little fish said, bewildered.

"Are you Chirpy Bird?" asked Glubber Fish.

"Yes.  I--"

"You must leave the pond."  It was a tone of finality.

"But why?" asked Chirpy Bird.

"Because you'll soon be eating us and our children.  Besides,
birds don't live under water."

"But I'm not a bird," Chirpy Bird protested.

"What's your name?" demanded the other, who was called Spotted Fish.

"Chirpy Bird.  But--"

"There you are," he said, with a tone of satisfaction.

"My name is Chirpy Bird," said the little one, "but I'm a fish."

"Nonsense," grumped Spotted Fish.  "Whoever heard of a fish
named Chirpy Bird?"

"Whether you've heard of me or not, here I am," said Chirpy
Bird, not knowing what else to say.

"Totally illogical," interrupted Whisker Fish, who had just come near.

"As well as disrespectful and impudent," added Glubber fish.

"You must listen to reason," said Whisker Fish, self-importantly
brushing himself in preparation.  "And here it is: You are Chirpy
Bird; granted.  Birds eat fish; granted.  Therefore, you eat fish."

"But--" Chirpy Bird tried to explain.

"There is no 'but.'  It's a syllogism, and cannot be answered.
The conclusion follows necessarily," said Whisker Fish.  "It's
pure logic."

"And it also follows," said Glubber fish, "that you must leave
the pond."

"I'll die if I leave the pond," said Chirpy Bird.

"That's not our problem," said Glubber Fish.

"And it's an irrelevant objection," added Whisker Fish.  The
rest of the adult fish had gradually been easing forward during
this conversation and now, at the direction of Glubber Fish, the
whole group escorted Chirpy Bird down toward the rocky beach.  In
a few minutes they reached a low spot near a weeping willow,
where several of the large fish grabbed Chirpy Bird and threw him
onto the shore.

"Now fly away and leave us alone," one of them said.  And leave
them alone he did.




Man

Somewhere in a deep, tropical jungle lived a tribe of natives with
extremely odd behavior.  Generations ago the tribe had in some
obscure fashion contracted a parasite which induced a seemingly
permanent delirium in each native, and which was passed on to
subsequent generations.  The delirium increased with age, and most
of the adult natives showed it by eating dirt, sleeping on dunghills,
pummeling anthills with rocks even as the ants bit them severely, and
jumping out of trees onto their heads.  This last maneuver caused the
natives to stagger around senseless for days, or simply to lie
unconscious and bleeding in the sun and rain.  All these symptoms
together prevented the natives from caring for their personal lives,
and so they lived in deplorable squalor, with their huts falling
apart, and their children and themselves half starved and wholly naked.

Another odd effect of the mental distraction was an unnatural craving
for firewood.  Unlike the other natives in the area, the members of
this tribe collected--and stole, and cheated and betrayed for--log upon
stick to pile next to their huts, even though in twenty very cold years
they couldn't use half as much as they already possessed.  A few
natives had been crushed to death by collapsing woodpiles; many more
had died from fighting over decidedly unimpressive old branches.

One day a doctor came from the East to the village, and he immediately
recognized the symptoms of the disease (a common one) for which he
carried the cure.  He went gladly and confidently to the chief of the
tribe and announced his ability to remedy the ills of the people,
expecting to be praised and welcomed for his offer of help.  To his
surprise, however, the chief rebuffed him with contempt and asserted
boldly that there was nothing at all wrong with his people, that they
had always acted that way since he could remember, that it was the
human condition, and that they were all perfectly happy.  Then,
after ordering the doctor to leave immediately, the chief jumped
out of a tree into the tribal latrine and was unavailable for any
further discussion.

Substantially taken aback but firm in his resolution, the doctor
decided to take his offer directly to the natives.  Most received
him with laughter, contempt, or violence; many ignored him; a few
beat him up; some said he just wanted to get at their firewood;
most said they, like the chief, felt fine.  But a dozen or so
natives came to him privately where he had been tossed into the
bushes after his most recent beating, and asked him for the medicine.

"We are somehow not really happy living like this," they said, "even
though it is the way of the world."  The doctor gladly gave them the
medicine, and in a few days they began to show remarkable signs of
recovery.  No longer desiring to eat dirt or jump out of trees, these
natives corrected their diet, improved in health, and began to apply
themselves to such activities as making baskets, repairing their huts,
caring for their children, and gathering food.  Some even began to
question the wisdom of collecting stacks of wood more than twenty
feet high.

Such wild, unusual, and anti-social behavior did not go unnoticed by
the other natives, who quickly ostracized the cured natives from the
tribal camp, calling them enemies of the current system.  And even
though many of the delirious natives began to suspect that the cured
natives were somehow better off than they, and that there might be
more to living than sleeping on dunghills and finding new trees to
jump out of, resistance to the cure was strong.  First, almost all
the educated and respectable people--the chief and his council--spoke
against it, and the example of their sophistication and wealth (the
chief's woodpile was ninety feet high) was very strong.  Many others,
from the gossips to the wise man, said that the old way was right,
and that the tribe had always behaved that way.  There were few real
individuals in the tribe, so that even though scores would have been
glad to try the cure, they were afraid to stand against the rest and
did what everyone else was doing, which was nothing.

The witch doctor had a stronger argument against the new regimen.  He
pointed out that the cure was harder to take than the cures he
dispensed.  The Eastern doctor's cure was painful, and though many of
the witch doctor's cures caused vomiting, hives, convulsions, and
hallucinations, the natives were all familiar with these effects and
attributed them to swallowing the medicine wrong, rather than to the
medicine itself.  But who knew what the fate of the cured natives
would eventually be?

The cured natives said they felt fine, but they might have been lying.
And who was fool enough to trust an outsider, a stranger, rather than
the familiar witch doctor, who cursed those who took the cure because
they rejected his medicines as false and pernicious?  The cured natives
said that a commitment must be made to trust the Eastern doctor; this
was too difficult or uncertain a step for many, especially in the face
of the social pressure around them.  A decision accompanied by fear,
decried by the important, and rejected by society could not be made
by everyone.

After the time of his stay was over, the Eastern doctor showed the
cured natives how to compound the medicine and then left.  As
generations passed, most of the natives remained loyal to the
dunghill, but a few took the cure.




Love

Otto and his girlfriend Brissa were driving merrily down the middle
of the road one rainy night on their way to a party when they
approached a little old lady trying vainly to change a flat tire.

"Gee, that's too bad," said Brissa.

"Yeah," agreed Otto.

"Maybe we should help her," added Brissa.

"We?  You mean me.  I'm not going to get wet.  Besides, what good
would it do me to help her?  I don't even know who she is, and she
probably doesn't have any money, or at least not enough to make
getting wet worthwhile."

"But it would make you feel good to do a good deed," Brissa offered.

"Well, it makes me feel good to stay in here and keep dry,"
snapped Otto.

"It would make me happy, Otto," said Brissa, in her softest, most
feminine voice.

"You?  Boy, you're awfully selfish.  Always thinking about yourself.
You know, I wasn't put here just to cater to your stupid, idle
whims."  As his anger rose, Otto sped up a little, just in time to
hit a large puddle near the little old lady, drenching her in a sheet
of muddy water.

"Stop, Otto!" Brissa cried, exasperated.  "I'll help her."

"Aw shut up," Otto snarled.  "Do you think I'm going to walk into the
party with a girl who's all wet and disheveled, looking like a
drowned rat?  You want people to laugh at me?  Think of somebody
besides yourself for a change.  Now fix your makeup and keep your
mouth shut."




Indecision

Once upon a time a dozen or so curious travelers rented a boat for a
cruise out to an enchanted island, where, it was said, Athena sat on
her throne dispensing rich gifts to all.  The trip was smooth enough
for awhile, with only a few rough seas to endure and an occasional
shoal to avoid.  But then one morning one of the passengers discovered
that the boat was taking on water.

"We're sinking, we're sinking!" some of the people cried.

"No," said the captain, "the flow is not yet so fast.  If we will get
some buckets and bail the water out, everything will be all right."
This solution seemed simple enough.

However, a dissension soon arose among the travelers about who would
do the bailing, and what buckets would be used.  "Allow me," said
one.  "It is my duty in this circumstance to bail, and I have here a
very solid bucket suitable to the task."

"Beg pardon, sir," said another, "but I must be the bailer.  It is
written in the laws of the sea that a person of my parts must do
this labor.  Besides, I have a superior bucket."

"Wait," said a third.  "This gentleman's bucket is all right, but I
think I should be allowed to help bail, since I am a fellow passenger."

Everyone adduced many weighty, true, and worthy philosophical
arguments for his position, and cited laws, ethics, and political
and procedural rules, but no person succeeded in convincing any
other.  Soon, therefore, the discussion ceased to remain at this
level, but grew rather heated, and shouts and aspersions began to
fill the air, with perhaps even a trace of ill will.

"I refuse to allow anyone to bail this boat unless he uses this
bucket, which, as any fool can see, is the only true bucket, clearly
superior to all others," screamed one.

"And I absolutely refuse to see this boat bailed unless I can take part
in the work," yelled another.

Now these passengers all had some interest in seeing the boat bailed,
and most hoped that this impasse could be overcome to the
satisfaction of everyone.  But since no one knew exactly what to
do, nothing was done.

"Perhaps we will get to the enchanted island without bailing the
boat," hoped one.

It was not to be so.  While the travelers continued to debate, some
suggesting unworkable alternatives and the others remaining
unyielding, the boat continued to fill, until at one sudden and
horrifying moment, the water rushed in over the gunwales and across
the deck.  The hold filled rapidly, and in spite of every man's
frenzied efforts, the boat sank, carrying the stubborn but now
too-late-repentant travelers, together with their screaming wives
and virgin daughters, to the very bottom of the sea.




The Limit

One day a man was walking through a forest and got lost.  "Nothing
could be worse than this," he said.  Then it got dark.  "Lost in
the dark.  What could be worse?" he asked.  Then it got cold.
"Now nothing could possibly be worse," he said as he shivered and
stumbled around.  But then it began to rain.  "How could anything
be worse than this?" he asked himself.  But then the rain turned
to snow and the wind came up.  "This is absolutely the worst
possible thing that could ever happen," he said.  "There's nothing
left."  But then he fell and broke his arm.  "Well, that's it," he
thought.  "This is the worst of all."  But as he lay in the snow, a
tree branch broke off and fell on him, breaking both his legs.
"This is worse than the worst," he thought.  "But at least nothing
else can happen."  But then he heard the sound of wolves coming his
way.  The noise was so startling that the man awoke and discovered
that he had been dreaming.  "What a dream I had," he said, shaking
himself.  "Nothing could be worse."




How Sir Reginald Helped the King

Once upon a time in the kingdom of Plebnia, the king was having a
real problem with his letters to the outlying regions.  His messages
always seemed to arrive too late.  No matter how early he mailed them,
his Christmas cards arrived in July and his Valentines arrived on
December 24, creating confusion and uncertainty among the people
and giving the Problem Element an excuse to arouse the Rabble
against him.

After some thought, the king had an idea: he would give ten million
greedos (their monetary unit) and the hand of his totally gorgeous
daughter to the person who could make his mail arrive the fastest.
His loyal subjects immediately rushed to solve the problem, setting
themselves to this task with an enthusiasm that an objective observer
might well have described as manic.  People ran back and forth, up and
down, muttering, "Move the mail, shove the mail, fling it, sling it.
Run.  Hurry.  Shoot the mail, toss it, heave it," and such like.

Included in the many and varied offered solutions were proposals to
build a rocket sled, crisscross the countryside with pneumatic tubes,
use fast horses stimulated by strong coffee, borrow a dragster from
the sports arena, set up a reliable airline, make a jet-powered
conveyor belt, or just use ordinary mailmen under the threat of
immediate, violent death if they delayed the mail.

However, Sir Reginald, the young, handsome hero of this tale, out of
the goodness of his heart, his love for the king, and the excitement
of the challenge (and scarcely considering the money or the girl more
than four or five hours a day), decided to take a few minutes to
examine the problem before he tried to solve it.

"Just what is it the king wants to do?" he asked himself.  "He wants
to send his mail quickly.  And just what is mail?  It's a message,
information.  Information, hmm.  Information can be sent
electronically, by wire or transmission.  Yes.  Hmm.  Yes--A
transmitter on one end and a printer on the other end would permit
the king's mail to be sent at the speed of light.  That should pretty
much squash Sir Rodney's proposal to use battery-powered frisbees."

Well, what can we say?  The brilliance of this proposal was so
obvious that Sir Reginald was declared the winner and the plan was
immediately instituted.  The mail began to arrive on time, the king
soon became popular again in the outlying regions, and Sir Reginald
retired to spend the rest of his days in a spiffy castle on top of
a hill, with his totally gorgeous wife and, later, seventeen children.




How the Noble Percival Won the Fair Arissa

Once upon a time in a kingdom by the sea, two knights stood talking
about the strategy of battle when their conversation was interrupted
by the sight of the beautiful Arissa as she walked upon the green.
"Forsooth, I think I'll ask her for a date," said Sir Wishful, one
of the knights.  "Ditto," said Sir Percival, the other knight.

So Sir Wishful sauntered up to Arissa in his most elegant and
refined manner, and, twirling his mustache genteelly, said, "Arissa,
my dear, methinks I'd like to take you out to dinner."

Arissa sized up Sir Wishful a moment and then replied, "Sorry,
Wishy, you're not my type."

Sir Percival, seeing his rival stumble off in a confused,
embarrassed, humiliated, dazed--oh you get the idea.  Anyway,
Sir Percival saw his opportunity and approached Arissa.  "Arissa,"
he said, "how about a date anon?"  Only a moment was needed for
the look of mild surprise to alter the beautiful maiden's features,
after which she laughed loudly in Sir Percival's face for a good
ten minutes.

Well, both Sir Wishful and Sir Percival retired to lick their wounds
and lament the fate of men in this whole romantic con game, and Sir
Wishful soon enough decided that he liked the taste of trout just
about as well as the taste of women's lips, so he grabbed his bait
and tackle and headed for the river.  Sir Percival, on the other hand,
really thought Arissa might be worth another attempt, and he
rationalized with himself that perhaps she didn't quite understand
the question.  "Or belikes the maiden is just shy," he thought.

So Sir Percival, seeing on another day the fair, delicate Arissa
using her footman's coat to clean the mud off her shoes, again
approached and asked: "Arissa, sweet one, won't you go out with
me sometime?"

Arissa generously gave Sir Percival a look that could have frozen
several pounds of choice lobster, and replied, "You must be kidding."

Sir Percival thought about this answer for a couple of days, and
still finding his inclination toward the gentle Arissa unchanged,
he thought to make a clarificatory attempt, just in case the maiden
did believe he had been kidding.  Approaching her the next morning,
Sir Percival said, "Kind Arissa, I wasn't kidding the other day.
Ifay, I'd like to date you."  Only the author's extreme commitment
to complete truth forces him to admit that a tiny trace of irritation
now flashed, but only for the briefest of moments, across the lovely
Arissa's brow.  "Get lost, creep," she said, clearly and distinctly.

Well, needless to say, by now most of the other knights in the realm
were getting sufficient jollies out of Sir Percival's romantic
endeavors.  Even Sir Wishful had joined in the laughter, ridicule,
and derision that seasoned Sir Percival's every meal with his friends.
This hilarity touched the young knight and caused him to spend several
days in contemplation of his past behavior.  "Am I gaining or losing
ground with Arissa?" he asked himself.  "Rather had she said, 'Get
lost' before she said, 'You must be kidding,' for as it stands, I
can't say I'm making much progress."

But "Steadfast" was probably Sir Percival's middle name (or his
uncle's middle name, anyway), so the knight decided to approach
Arissa yet again.  After all, Arissa seemed to be pretty okay,
and Sir Percival wanted a date.  In a few days, then, Arissa
heard a familiar question in a familiar voice: "Arissa, sweetheart,
let me ensconce you in my carriage and take you on a date."  To
which Arissa replied, "Sorry Perce, I'm busy.  I've got to
wash my hair."

To which the knight: "Well, when could you go then?"

To which Arissa: "Well, I'll be busy for the next ten years.  I
mean, I've got stuff to do, forsooth."

Well, our hero was getting a bit despondent about all this, and for
sure his friends weren't helping much.  Far from their giving him
encouragement, their laughter rang so constantly in Sir Percival's
head that he began to wonder if he was still quite sane.  And not
a few of his friends hinted here and there that psychiatric
consultation might be useful to the knight, to get him over his
ridiculous interest in the agreeable Arissa.

About this time it so happened that as Sir Percival was on his way
to visit Sir Wishful for a nice dinner of trout and onions, he quite
unexpectedly came upon Arissa, lovely as ever, sitting near the
village waterfall and picking her teeth.  Almost out of habit, Sir
Percival spoke: "Arissa, sugar, would you like to go out with
me sometime?"

To which Arissa: "Oh, Perce, didn't I tell you I was busy?"

To which Sir Percival: "Yeah, fair one, but I thought maybe you'd
had a cancellation or something."

To which Arissa: "Well, if I did have a cancellation, I wouldn't
fill it up with you.  Besides, what would we do?"

To which Sir Percival: "We could go to dinner."

To which Arissa: "Like where, ifay?"

To which Sir Percival: "Andre's French Victuals."

To which Arissa: "And when would this be?"

To which Sir Percival: "I dunno.  How about tomorrow night?"

To which--well, anyway, to her own surprise, to the astonishment of
Sir Percival, and to the great confusion of the rest of the kingdom,
Arissa finally actually agreed to this scenario and the next evening
the two young people went to Andre's.

Arissa, of course, ordered the eleven most expensive things on the
menu, for she was still intending to discourage Sir Percival, but
the knight was willing to put up with only a glass of water for his
own dinner, because the success he had enjoyed so far with the
desirable Arissa had quite taken away his appetite anyway.

In the course of the evening, Arissa happened to remark, "I wish
they had apricots on the menu here.  You know, I really love them.
I could eat them by the ton."

To which Sir Percival: "Why, Arissa, my dove, I own an orchard of
apricot trees."

To which Arissa: "Really?  Oh, Perce."  When she pronounced his name,
the young maiden sighed and a glisten appeared in one or both eyes.

Well, from here the story gets pretty mushy, so we'd better make it
short.  This delightful couple soon held hands; they discovered anon
that their lips fit together pretty well, Arissa's ten years' worth
of plans were miraculously cancelled, and Sir Percival finally asked
the Big Question, to which Arissa replied, "Well, okay."

And so they were married and lived happily ever after, with Arissa
often telling Sir Percival how she had secretly loved him from the
first time she saw him, while Sir Percival, each time he kissed
Arissa's apricot-flavored lips, congratulated himself for his skill
in winning her.




Truth Carved in Stone

A wise old philosopher was walking through the park with a young man
and his true love when they came upon a beautiful statue of a Nereid.
"Come here," he said to the youth, "and touch this statue." The young
man put his hand on the statue's arm and felt of it closely, though
he did not seem surprised at what he found.  "Now the girl," the old
man continued; so the lover also felt of his girlfriend's arm, in the
same way.  "And now," the man said, "tell me what you have learned."

"I'm not sure," the young man began.  "The statue is hard and cold;
the girl is warm and soft.  Her flesh yields when I press; the marble
does not."

"You have learned well," concluded the philosopher, "and if each of
you remembers and lives by these truths, you will have a happy
life together."




How Sir Philo Married a Beautiful Princess
Instead of the Woman He Loved

Once upon a time--and it had to be pretty long ago, as you will
see--there lived a bunch of people in a little inland kingdom.  The
king, Cleon the Modest, was basically a good fellow, though he was
not known for his brilliance in government.  Instead, he was known
chiefly for his glowing and nubile daughter, Jennifrella, a girl,
though proud and a trifle petulant, so freighted with beauty and
charms that pretty much every bachelor--and not a few married
men--in the kingdom dreamed about her, whether awake or asleep.
Truly, she maketh my pen tremble even as I write this.

Now Cleon was desirous of marrying off this legendary beauty as soon
as possible so that he could be free of the constant entreaties for
her hand, free of the frequent bills for supplying her dressing table,
and free to spend more time in his rose garden, which he truly loved.
The king would have had little trouble choosing the richest suitor in
the kingdom for his daughter, except that there were no exceptionally
wealthy bachelors in the realm, and those of modest wealth all had
castles and money boxes of essentially similar dimensions.

For her part, the Princess Jennifrella was repletely enamored of Sir
Fassade, a handsome, dashing, suave, carefree young knight who most
people, when they faced reality, agreed would almost certainly become
her husband and therefore the next king.

King Cleon, however, was desirous of exercising his regal authority
in having a say in who would follow him on the throne.  And faced
with what he clearly saw was an impossible number of choices, he
therefore sought the opinion of his favorite advisor, the young Sir
Philo.  Now, persons of a cynical bent might begin to think that Sir
Philo, an eligible bachelor himself and not at all impervious to
feminine gorgeousness, would argue craftily that he himself was the
most suitable and worthy candidate.  This might have been so but for
two equally powerful reasons.  First, Sir Philo, brave, skilled, and
thoughtful, was a man of integrity who would never abuse his position
as the king's advisor to advance his own interests, even in a matter
so emotionally and biologically compelling as that before us.  The
other reason is that Sir Philo was already in love with another.  It
was a gentle love, like a deep river, quiet and calm on the surface
but fully substantial and powerful in its flow.

His happiness, the Lady Lucinda, though not of outward visage the
equal of Jennifrella, was handsome enough for the young knight's
daydreams.  When asked what attracted him to Lucinda, he would answer
ambiguously or mutter something about the light in her eyes.  What
joy he got sitting with her under a tree in the bright spring, gazing
upon her and dallying with her fingers or brushing a love-sick gnat
from her collar.  But what really twirled Sir Philo's cuff links was
Lucinda's wit, her laugh, her playfulness.  He relished taking the
sprightly maid hand in hand on long walks, listening to the music of
her voice and to the sentiments accompanying the music.  How he loved
to play with her tresses, or when her hair was up, to steal up behind
her and kiss her unexpectedly on the back of the neck: for she would
invariably produce a little shriek of surprise and delight and
embarrassment, and then turning to him, her cheeks glowing
irresistibly, attempt to glare and call him "monster," only to spoil
her mock anger by bursting into giggles or even outright laughter.
She would chide him and call him "rogue," and "impertinent," and he
would say something like, "I'll put a stop to this abuse," and then
their lips, who were old friends by now, would once again meet for
fellowship.  Of course, Lucinda would struggle just enough to
enhance the enjoyment, until laughter or an unexpected visitor broke
their embrace.

Well, enough mush.  The point is that an unspoken understanding had
developed between them so that only a few months after the rest of
the kingdom knew it, they realized that they would one day wed and
together laugh and cry through the years until death should wake them.

But to return to the weightier problem of King Cleon.  Upon being
asked for his advice, Sir Philo recommended that the king choose from
among the following options.  One, his majesty could choose the wisest
and most just suitor for Jennifrella, for such a man would not only
make a good king, but he would most likely be a decent husband, too.
Or secondly, the king might seek a foreign alliance and marry his
daughter to another king's son.  This was an alternative which Sir
Philo did not recommend, but mentioned only for the sake of
completeness.  And finally, the last possibility would be to let
Jennifrella choose for herself--in which case, everyone knew that
Sir Fassade would be the next king, and he, opined Sir Philo, would
be "acceptable," producing a government no worse than the current
one.  (Since I have already described the king's advisor as
"thoughtful," I shall now add "tactful" and note that the final
participial phrase of the previous sentence was thought but not
uttered by the knight.)  As for the kind of husband Sir Fassade would
make, the princess would have no one to blame but herself.

King Cleon thought the matter over not quite long enough and decided
to hold an archery contest, the winner of which would marry his
daughter.  The degree of Sir Philo's consternation is not recorded
in the annals from which I am plagiarizing, but one may suppose that
it was substantial, for reasons which will hereinafter appear.
Needless to say (except to make the story longer and extend the
reader's pleasure), Sir Philo made energetic protests, which
eventually descended to rather pathetic entreaties, all in a
futile attempt to change the king's mind.  But King Cleon would
not be dissuaded, and so the news was soon heralded throughout the
kingdom, and, as you might suppose, arrow sales shot up immediately
and remarkably.

As when a child pounds the ground near an anthill, causing a good
many of the residents instantly to surface and run around in massed
panic, so on the day of the contest the world arrived in a swarm at
the castle of Cleon the Modest and prepared to be a witness, if not
the victor, in the winning of Jennifrella.

There were several dozen contenders in the contest, some quite
accomplished archers, some more or less dilettantish, and quite a
few whose skills put the spectators at random hazard.  Amid the
noise and enthusiasm on this day stood a grim and silent Sir Philo,
deeply troubled about the proceedings for three reasons.  First,
strictly from a philosophical standpoint, a shooting contest was
a completely irrational method of choosing either a spouse or a
future king, and irrationality like this always troubled the
young knight.

Second, though Sir Fassade was a very good shot, capable of
satisfactorily humiliating most of the other contestants, he was no
match for Sir Bargle.  If they used the word then, I would have to
exaggerate only slightly to say that Sir Bargle was, as they say in
French, or maybe don't, a jerque.  He punctuated nearly every
sentence with an oath or a belch, constantly leered at the ladies
in waiting (who knew all too well to keep a safe distance from him),
and those who attended carefully to his speech noted that the word
he used more than any other was "me." In a word (or fourteen,
actually), Sir Bargle was a man unlikely to put his personal
appetites in second place.  The prospect of this knight nuzzling
the hair or nibbling the earlobes of Jennifrella was in itself
sufficiently revulsive to Sir Philo; the prospect of his becoming
king was absolutely unthinkable.

The third reason that the king's advisor was grieved about the
"score ahead and wed" method of selecting the princess' groom was
that the only person in all the realm who could outshoot Sir Bargle
was--Sir Philo.

Prithee, talk not to me about psychic conflict--nay, psychic trauma,
for I have seen it here, and it is not gentle.  Sir Philo traced and
retraced many steps around the castle grounds, without thought of
direction or destination, the movement of his feet and the tension
on his face reflecting the turmoil in his soul.  At length, in his
anxiety, the brave knight turned to his lady love for succor and
advice, and she, with a swiftness that surprised him and a nobility
that made him love her more deeply than ever, told him that of course
he must put the interest of the kingdom above his personal happiness.
She then flew into his arms and burst into inconsolable sobbing for
longer than we have time to look in on.

The contest began and proceeded remarkably well, with only the loss
of a too-curious cow and a few luckless birds at the hands of the
less accomplished suitors.  Sir Fassade shot well that day, achieving
a personal best.  As each arrow hit, closer and closer toward the
middle of the target, it made the princess clap a little louder and
leap with joy a little higher.  A smirk of self-congratulation soon
decorated Sir Fassade's handsome face.

A loud belch and a louder laugh announced the commencement of Sir
Bargle's shooting.  As predicted by Sir Philo, Sir Bargle was an
excellent shot.  As each arrow landed a good handbreadth closer to
the center of the target than any of those of Sir Fassade, the smiles
on the faces of the princess and her favorite knight grew less and
less until they had been completely replaced by somber looks on the
knight and what might be described as silent hysteria on the face of
the princess.  The look on Sir Bargle's face at the conclusion of his
shooting is a little too carnal for me to describe.

As he shot his set of arrows, Sir Philo was forced more than once,
after he had fully drawn his bow, to pause, and to wait until a
little tremble--attributed by the crowd to nervousness and eagerness
to win Jennifrella--left his hands.  As each arrow hit the target,
remarkably near the middle, it also pierced the very center of
Lucinda's heart.  The young knight thought more than once about
letting an arrow fly wide of the target, but he did his duty,
though it brought grief to himself and devastation to the woman
he treasured.

Sir Philo's smile as he took the hand of the princess was obviously
forced, but no one noticed because Jennifrella was now bawling so
spectacularly that the crowd, though not at all wishing to be unkind,
found it, frankly, entertaining.

As it does for us all, time passed and life went on.

After a peculiar three years' delay, Lucinda finally made her choice
from among several good offers and moved with her new husband to a
remote part of the kingdom where it was reported that she was content,
though some said that the cooler climate had somewhat subdued her
well-known effervescence.

In the fullness of time, Sir Philo exchanged his sword for a crown
and ascended the throne.  He ruled wisely and justly, and the kingdom
prospered.  Hero that he was, he had mostly adjusted to the princess'
personality, reminding himself as occasion required (and occasion did
require), that not only had he acted for the good of the kingdom, but
he had wed great beauty and, eventually, personal power.  He further
reminded himself that Jennifrella had made an adequate wife, even
after her face wrinkled and her tummy pudged, and that she had proved
to be a reasonable mother to his children.  Whenever, in a moment of
inattention, he discovered himself pining to enjoy a witty remark or
some unguarded laughter, he quoted, hoping that it was true, the old
proverb that "we grow most not when something is given but when
something is taken away."

All in all, it was a reasonable life with much to be thankful for.
Jennifrella's joy was that Sir Philo, now King Philo, remained a
generous and loving husband even as her beauty faded; her only
regret was that Sir Fassade had married her younger and more amiable
sister, and both of them appeared to be altogether too happy.
Lucinda's joy was in her two lovely children, whom she took, once or
twice, to see the new king as he made a royal progress through their
village.  Her only regret was that she could reveal only half her
heart as she told them what a good man he was.  Sir Philo's joy was
that he had acted virtuously and now enjoyed a mostly pleasant life,
dispensing justice and mercy with care and humanity.  His only regret
was that he had learned to shoot arrows.




Serendipity

A young man, in the confusion and embarrassment of youth, was walking
across the campus of a great university on the way to his philosophy
class.  At the previous meeting, the professor had posed the
question, "If we do not know the purpose of something, how can we
know whether any aspect of it is good or bad?"  This question,
together with the problem for the day, "Does man have a purpose?" had
taken complete occupation of the young man's mind, not because of any
intrinsic interest, but because the professor was in the habit of
calling on students and expecting a thoughtful response.  So deeply
meditative was the young man that he neglected to observe his path
adequately, with the result that he soon bounced his head off an
unhappily placed tree in the middle of the lawn.

Picking himself up and dusting himself off, the young man looked
around to see if anyone had witnessed his inadvertent folly.  The
only people nearby were two men, who, although they were just a dozen
feet away, were completely oblivious to the young man's accident, for
the reason that they were engaged in a somewhat heated argument.
Whether to obtain some sympathy for his bruised head, or to excuse his
inattention, or perhaps simply because they were standing near a wheel
barrow and looked for all the world like gardeners, the young man
interrupted them with the slightly exasperated question, "Excuse me,
but what is that tree doing there, anyway?"

Now it so happens that these two men were not gardeners at all.  They
were, in fact, tenured professors of philosophy, the very subject the
young man was struggling to understand.  They turned to him at once
and condescended to admit him to their conversation.

"Well," said the first philosopher, pushing his glasses up the bridge
of his nose, "see here.  This is a tree."  And pointing to the tree
the young man was already too-intimately familiar with, concluded with
apparent satisfaction, "As Circumplexius has said in the fourth book
of his De Scientia, 'An example is the best definition.'"

"I know that is a tree," replied the youth, rubbing his forehead.
"What I want to know is, Why is it there in the first place?"

"You see," said the other philosopher to the first, "the dance of
the blind with the senile."  Then, momentarily stroking his beard, he
turned to the young man and continued, "A tree means what it is.  The
concept of treedom does not subsist in some fortuitous, exogenous
hyle--that is the doctrine of carpenters, not of philosophers.  As
Herman of Rimboa has aptly remarked, 'Inner eyes must perceive beyond
what the outer eyes see.'"

"And as the Chinese say, 'The flies buzz in the wind, but men drink
their tea,'" added the one with glasses.  "Here, son," he went on,
pointing again, "this is also a tree.  Compare them and deduce
treehood by subtracting the anomalous from the universal."

"Certainly you have read Dohesius On the Nature of the Universe in
the last twenty-five years," the other philosopher said with some
indignation.  "Don't you recall his dictum that 'a second example is
not an explanation'?  How do you pretend to instruct the ignorance of
youth when you have never instructed yourself?  'The canvas remains
blank when the artist has no paint,' says Hugo de Brassus.  Go back
to your books."

"And as de Roquefort says, 'To sit on a cheese and eat whey is the
destiny of fools.'"

"See here, young man," said the beard, ignoring his colleague,
"treeness is a life process displaying the aspiration of matter
toward hierarchy, order, and structure.  It finds analogues and
even homologues in life systems everywhere."

"The frogs croak at night, but the sky remains dark," said the
glasses, smirking slightly.

"Nonsense," replied the beard.  "What I have said is self-evident.
Sir Humphrey Boodle even noted it."

"But Boodle has been refuted these three hundred years."

"Well, Calesimon said so, too."

"Hah!" cried the glasses with a laugh of forced incredulity.
"Calesimon!  Calesimon was an idiot!"

"Argumentum ad hominem."

"Oh, come on.  The man was institutionalized."

"And genetic fallacy, too.  My, my."

"Ignore him, son," said the glasses to the youth.  "He's not been
very well since his wife laughed at his last paper.  A tree--"

"She did not laugh," interrupted the beard.

"--is a woody plant containing specialized structures, larger overall
than a bush and often, as you see here [pointing] having only one
trunk rather than many."

"And is this the effect of dotage or of primordial ignorance?"

"False dilemma, Mr. Logician."

"Surely you were there that day in bonehead English when they
distinguished between 'definition' and 'explanation.'  You are familiar
with the English language, aren't you?  The young man has asked for
an explanation."

"Well, as Frabonarde says, 'The whole is known by its parts.'"

"The doctrine of those who pull the wings from fruit flies."

"Yes, it would be too straightforward for someone who needs six
hundred pages to discover that he doesn't know what he is
talking about."

"A classic example of the projectionist error.  Not everything you
don't understand is a problem with the text," said the beard, tapping
his finger to his temple.

"If I may be permitted one last allusion to Oriental wisdom, I would
note only that the Chinese have said, 'Men hurt their eyes seeking
a water lily in a rock garden--even in a large rock garden.'"

"I thought you knew that the Poems of Chen had been exposed as a
product of nineteenth-century Europe.  Don't make it a habit to go
around quoting hoaxes.  It gives philosophy a bad name."

"Excuse me, sirs," the youth interjected, "but I have to go now."

"Very well," said the beard.  "Only remember, with the knowledge
you attain, seek to achieve understanding."

"Oh, so now we are quoting the Bible!" cried the glasses with
triumphant scorn.  "The rest of the department will be interested
in this."

"I was not quoting the Bible.  I have never even read the Bible."

"Why don't you ask God to bless him while you're at it?"

"Listen, don't you think I know that your doctrine of cosmic mental
states is just a front and that you're a closet monotheist?"

"And may I remind you that slander is an offense punishable by law?"

"And is this the state of a wise man?" asked the beard, looking at
the sky, "to threaten his friend for speaking truth?"

"Now he's even praying!  I can't believe this!"

"'We cannot see around corners,' says Germulphius, 'so what is left
to the man who refuses to see in a straight line?'"

"Someone like your wife," answered the glasses.  "No doubt by now
she's found twelve more insupportably ridiculous assertions in your
paper on aperceptual phenomenalism."

"Well, at least my wife reads my papers.  At least my wife can read."

"My wife is an avid reader of literature."

"Since when did the television listings become 'literature'?  That's
the most transparent semantic ploy I have ever heard."

"Are you accusing me of owning a television?"

"He who can see the maggots need not ask if the dog is dead."

"'Ignore the shadow cast by a passing vapor,' says Phonetes."

"You've always been sloppy with bibliography, haven't you?" demanded
the beard.  "Phonetes would have been utterly embarrassed to have
said that."

"No matter.  Truth needs no ascription."

"That statement is obviously the product of extensive reading and
protracted thought.  With a little more effort, no doubt you'll be
able to announce that the sun shines on a clear day."

"I suppose you have never read von Hoch: 'I had always known what he
said, but I did not live it until I heard it spoken.'"

"I reject that statement together with its sordid implications.  It
smacks of the grimy hands of utilitarianism.  In a minute you'll be
insisting that philosophy have practical consequences for berry
pickers and children.  Perhaps you would be happier as some sort of
mechanic where you could get your hands on things, rather than as one
who pretends to instruct youth."

"You and Sir Peter Poole, who was proud that he couldn't tell a hoe
from a rake."

"Well, what of that?  My profession is philosophy, and I look for truth,
not for mud."

"Even the sun cannot be seen through a silver coin."

"I have never accepted money for anything I've published," said the
beard hotly.

"'Beware of those who look to the right and walk to the left,' says
della Corta."

"How dare you accuse me--"  At this point they were interrupted.  A
young man, deeply preoccupied with thinking about the purpose of
mankind, had just bounced his head against a tree and--ah, but this
is where you came in.




A Tale Revealing the Wisdom Of Being a Cork on the River of Life

Once upon a time, not very far from a town pretty much like yours,
an old, nearsighted man was wandering down a country road quite
pleasantly, musing to himself thusly: "I wonder what I should seek
today?  Some new treasure of the Orient, or a lost clue to the
secrets of nature?  That would be nice, as I spit" (and here, had
there been but a small brass spittoon by the wayside, a clear ring
would have sounded across the nearby pastures), "but," continued the
old man, "this is pretty barren ground