The Project Gutenberg eBook of Clotelle; Or, The Colored Heroine, a tale of the Southern States; Or, The President's Daughter
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Clotelle; Or, The Colored Heroine, a tale of the Southern States; Or, The President's Daughter

Author: William Wells Brown


        
Release date: July 2, 2008 [eBook #241]
                Most recently updated: May 7, 2024

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/241

Credits: Produced by Anthony J. Adam and David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CLOTELLE; OR, THE COLORED HEROINE, A TALE OF THE SOUTHERN STATES; OR, THE PRESIDENT'S DAUGHTER ***




CLOTELLE; OR, THE COLORED HEROINE.

A TALE OF THE SOUTHERN STATES.


By William Wells Brown





CLOTELLE




CHAPTER I. THE SOUTHERN SOCIAL CIRCLE


FOR many years the South has been noted for its beautiful Quadroon
women. Bottles of ink, and reams of paper, have been used to portray the
“finely-cut and well-moulded features,” the “silken curls,” the “dark
and brilliant eyes,” the “splendid forms,” the “fascinating smiles,” and
“accomplished manners” of these impassioned and voluptuous daughters of
the two races,--the unlawful product of the crime of human bondage. When
we take into consideration the fact that no safeguard was ever thrown
around virtue, and no inducement held out to slave-women to be pure and
chaste, we will not be surprised when told that immorality pervades
the domestic circle in the cities and towns of the South to an extent
unknown in the Northern States. Many a planter's wife has dragged out
a miserable existence, with an aching heart, at seeing her place in the
husband's affections usurped by the unadorned beauty and captivating
smiles of her waiting-maid. Indeed, the greater portion of the colored
women, in the days of slavery, had no greater aspiration than that of
becoming the finely-dressed mistress of some white man. At the negro
balls and parties, that used to be so frequently given, this class of
women generally made the most splendid appearance.

A few years ago, among the many slave-women of Richmond, Va., who hired
their time of their masters, was Agnes, a mulatto owned by John Graves,
Esq., and who might be heard boasting that she was the daughter of an
American Senator. Although nearly forty years of age at the time of
which we write, Agnes was still exceedingly handsome. More than half
white, with long black hair and deep blue eyes, no one felt like
disputing with her when she urged her claim to her relationship with
the Anglo-Saxon. In her younger days, Agnes had been a housekeeper for
a young slave-holder, and in sustaining this relation had become the
mother of two daughters. After being cast aside by this young man,
the slave-woman betook herself to the business of a laundress, and was
considered to be the most tasteful woman in Richmond at her vocation.

Isabella and Marion, the two daughters of Agnes, resided with their
mother, and gave her what aid they could in her business. The mother,
however, was very choice of her daughters, and would allow them to
perform no labor that would militate against their lady-like appearance.
Agnes early resolved to bring up her daughters as ladies, as she termed
it.

As the girls grew older, the mother had to pay a stipulated price for
them per month. Her notoriety as a laundress of the first class enabled
her to put an extra charge upon the linen that passed through her hands;
and although she imposed little or no work upon her daughters, she was
enabled to live in comparative luxury and have her daughters dressed to
attract attention, especially at the negro balls and parties.

Although the term “negro ball” is applied to these gatherings, yet a
large portion of the men who attend them are whites. Negro balls and
parties in the Southern States, especially in the cities and towns, are
usually made up of quadroon women, a few negro men, and any number of
white gentlemen. These are gatherings of the most democratic character.
Bankers, merchants, lawyers, doctors, and their clerks and students, all
take part in these social assemblies upon terms of perfect equality. The
father and son not unfrequently meet and dance _vis a vis_ at a negro
ball.

It was at one of these parties that Henry Linwood, the son of a wealthy
and retired gentleman of Richmond, was first introduced to Isabella, the
oldest daughter of Agnes. The young man had just returned from Harvard
College, where he had spent the previous five years. Isabella was in
her eighteenth year, and was admitted by all who knew her to be the
handsomest girl, colored or white, in the city. On this occasion, she
was attired in a sky-blue silk dress, with deep black lace flounces,
and bertha of the same. On her well-moulded arms she wore massive gold
bracelets, while her rich black hair was arranged at the back in broad
basket plaits, ornamented with pearls, and the front in the French style
(_a la Imperatrice_), which suited her classic face to perfection.

Marion was scarcely less richly dressed than her sister.

Henry Linwood paid great attention to Isabella, which was looked
upon with gratification by her mother, and became a matter of general
conversation with all present. Of course, the young man escorted the
beautiful quadroon home that evening, and became the favorite visitor at
the house of Agnes.

It was on a beautiful moonlight night in the month of August, when all
who reside in tropical climates are eagerly gasping for a breath of
fresh air, that Henry Linwood was in the garden which surrounded Agnes'
cottage, with the young quadroon at his side. He drew from his pocket a
newspaper wet from the press, and read the following advertisement:--

     NOTICE.--Seventy-nine negroes will be offered for sale
     on Monday, September 10, at 12 o'clock, being the entire
     stock of the late John Graves.  The negroes are in excellent
     condition, and all warranted against the common vices.
     Among them are several mechanics, able-bodied field-hands,
     plough-boys, and women with children, some of them very prolific,
     affording a rare opportunity for any one who wishes to raise
     a strong and healthy lot of servants for their own use.
     Also several mulatto girls of rare personal qualities,--
     two of these very superior.

Among the above slaves advertised for sale were Agnes and her two
daughters. Ere young Linwood left the quadroon that evening, he promised
her that he would become her purchaser, and make her free and her own
mistress.

Mr. Graves had long been considered not only an excellent and upright
citizen of the first standing among the whites, but even the slaves
regarded him as one of the kindest of masters. Having inherited his
slaves with the rest of his property, he became possessed of them
without any consultation or wish of his own. He would neither buy nor
sell slaves, and was exceedingly careful, in letting them out, that they
did not find oppressive and tyrannical masters. No slave speculator ever
dared to cross the threshold of this planter of the Old Dominion. He
was a constant attendant upon religious worship, and was noted for his
general benevolence. The American Bible Society, the American Tract
Society, and the cause of the Foreign Missions, found in him a liberal
friend. He was always anxious that his slaves should appear well on the
Sabbath, and have an opportunity of hearing the word of God.




CHAPTER II. THE NEGRO SALE


AS might have been expected, the day of sale brought an unusually large
number together to compete for the property to be sold. Farmers, who
make a business of raising slaves for the market, were there, and
slave-traders, who make a business of buying human beings in the
slave-raising States and taking them to the far South, were also in
attendance. Men and women, too, who wished to purchase for their own
use, had found their way to the slave sale.

In the midst of the throng was one who felt a deeper interest in the
result of the sale than any other of the bystanders. This was young
Linwood. True to his promise, he was there with a blank bank-check in
his pocket, awaiting with impatience to enter the list as a bidder for
the beautiful slave.

It was indeed a heart-rending scene to witness the lamentations of these
slaves, all of whom had grown up together on the old homestead of Mr.
Graves, and who had been treated with great kindness by that gentleman,
during his life. Now they were to be separated, and form new relations
and companions. Such is the precarious condition of the slave. Even
when with a good master, there is not certainty of his happiness in the
future.

The less valuable slaves were first placed upon the auction-block, one
after another, and sold to the highest bidder. Husbands and wives were
separated with a degree of indifference that is unknown in any other
relation in life. Brothers and sisters were torn from each other, and
mothers saw their children for the last time on earth.

It was late in the day, and when the greatest number of persons were
thought to be present, when Agnes and her daughters were brought out to
the place of sale. The mother was first put upon the auction-block, and
sold to a noted negro trader named Jennings. Marion was next ordered to
ascend the stand, which she did with a trembling step, and was sold for
$1200.

All eyes were now turned on Isabella, as she was led forward by the
auctioneer. The appearance of the handsome quadroon caused a deep
sensation among the crowd. There she stood, with a skin as fair as most
white women, her features as beautifully regular as any of her sex
of pure Anglo-Saxon blood, her long black hair done up in the neatest
manner, her form tall and graceful, and her whole appearance indicating
one superior to her condition.

The auctioneer commenced by saying that Miss Isabella was fit to deck
the drawing-room of the finest mansion in Virginia.

“How much, gentlemen, for this real Albino!--fit fancy-girl for any one!
She enjoys good health, and has a sweet temper. How much do you say?”

“Five hundred dollars.”

“Only five hundred for such a girl as this? Gentlemen, she is worth
a deal more than that sum. You certainly do not know the value of the
article you are bidding on. Here, gentlemen, I hold in my hand a paper
certifying that she has a good moral character.”

“Seven hundred.”

“Ah, gentlemen, that is something life. This paper also states that she
is very intelligent.”

“Eight hundred.”

“She was first sprinkled, then immersed, and is now warranted to be a
devoted Christian, and perfectly trustworthy.”

“Nine hundred dollars.”

“Nine hundred and fifty.”

“One thousand.”

“Eleven hundred.”

Here the bidding came to a dead stand. The auctioneer stopped, looked
around, and began in a rough manner to relate some anecdote connected
with the sale of slaves, which he said had come under his own
observation.

At this juncture the scene was indeed a most striking one. The laughing,
joking, swearing, smoking, spitting, and talking, kept up a continual
hum and confusion among the crowd, while the slave-girl stood with
tearful eyes, looking alternately at her mother and sister and toward
the young man whom she hoped would become her purchaser.

“The chastity of this girl,” now continued the auctioneer, “is pure.
She has never been from under her mother's care. She is virtuous, and as
gentle as a dove.”

The bids here took a fresh start, and went on until $1800 was reached.
The auctioneer once more resorted to his jokes, and concluded by
assuring the company that Isabella was not only pious, but that she
could make an excellent prayer.

“Nineteen hundred dollars.”

“Two thousand.”

This was the last bid, and the quadroon girl was struck off, and became
the property of Henry Linwood.

This was a Virginia slave-auction, at which the bones, sinews, blood,
and nerves of a young girl of eighteen were sold for $500; her moral
character for $200; her superior intellect for $100; the benefits
supposed to accrue from her having been sprinkled and immersed, together
with a warranty of her devoted Christianity, for $300; her ability to
make a good prayer for $200; and her chastity for $700 more. This, too,
in a city thronged with churches, whose tall spires look like so many
signals pointing to heaven, but whose ministers preach that slavery is a
God-ordained institution!

The slaves were speedily separated, and taken along by their respective
masters. Jennings, the slave-speculator, who had purchased Agnes and
her daughter Marion, with several of the other slaves, took them to the
county prison, where he usually kept his human cattle after purchasing
them, previous to starting for the New Orleans market.

Linwood had already provided a place for Isabella, to which she was
taken. The most trying moment for her was when she took leave of her
mother and sister. The “Good-by” of the slave is unlike that of any
other class in the community. It is indeed a farewell forever. With
tears streaming down their cheeks, they embraced and commended each
other to God, who is no respecter of persons, and before whom master and
slave must one day appear.




CHAPTER III. THE SLAVE-SPECULATOR


DICK JENNINGS the slave-speculator, was one of the few Northern men, who
go to the South and throw aside their honest mode of obtaining a living
and resort to trading in human beings. A more repulsive-looking person
could scarcely be found in any community of bad looking men. Tall, lean
and lank, with high cheek-bones, face much pitted with the small-pox,
gray eyes with red eyebrows, and sandy whiskers, he indeed stood alone
without mate or fellow in looks. Jennings prided himself upon what he
called his goodness of heat, and was always speaking of his humanity. As
many of the slaves whom he intended taking to the New Orleans market had
been raised in Richmond, and had relations there, he determined to leave
the city early in the morning, so as not to witness any of the scenes
so common on the departure of a slave-gang to the far South. In this, he
was most successful; for not even Isabella, who had called at the prison
several times to see her mother and sister, was aware of the time that
they were to leave.

The slave-trader started at early dawn, and was beyond the confines of
the city long before the citizens were out of their beds. As a slave
regards a life on the sugar, cotton, or rice plantation as even worse
than death, they are ever on the watch for an opportunity to escape. The
trader, aware of this, secures his victims in chains before he sets out
on his journey. On this occasion, Jennings had the men chained in pairs,
while the women were allowed to go unfastened, but were closely watched.

After a march of eight days, the company arrived on the banks of
the Ohio River, where they took a steamer for the place of their
destination. Jennings had already advertised in the New Orleans papers,
that he would be there with a prime lot of able-bodied slaves, men
and women, fit for field-service, with a few extra ones calculated for
house-servants,--all between the ages of fifteen and twenty-five years;
but like most men who make a business of speculating in human beings, he
often bought many who were far advanced in years, and would try to pass
them off for five or six years younger than they were. Few persons
can arrive at anything approaching the real age of the negro, by mere
observation, unless they are well acquainted with the race. Therefore,
the slave-trader frequently carried out the deception with perfect
impunity.

After the steamer had left the wharf and was fairly out on the bosom of
the broad Mississippi, the speculator called his servant Pompey to him;
and instructed him as to getting the negroes ready for market. Among
the forty slaves that the trader had on this occasion, were some whose
appearance indicated that they had seen some years and had gone through
considerable service. Their gray hair and whiskers at once pronounced
them to be above the ages set down in the trader's advertisement. Pompey
had long been with Jennings, and understood his business well, and if
he did not take delight in the discharge of his duty, he did it at least
with a degree of alacrity, so that he might receive the approbation of
his master.

Pomp, as he was usually called by the trader, was of real negro blood,
and would often say, when alluding to himself, “Dis nigger am no
counterfeit, he is de ginuine artikle. Dis chile is none of your
haf-and-haf, dere is no bogus about him.”

Pompey was of low stature, round face, and, like most of his race, had
a set of teeth, which, for whiteness and beauty, could not be surpassed;
his eyes were large, lips thick, and hair short and woolly. Pompey had
been with Jennings so long, and had seen so much of buying and selling
of his fellow-creatures, that he appeared perfectly indifferent to the
heart-rending scenes which daily occurred in his presence. Such is the
force of habit:--

      “Vice is a monster of such frightful mien,
      That to be hated, needs but to be seen;
      But seen too oft, familiar with its face,
      We first endure, then pity, then embrace.”

It was on the second day of the steamer's voyage, that Pompey selected
five of the oldest slaves, took them into a room by themselves, and
commenced preparing them for the market.

“Now,” said he, addressing himself to the company, “I is de chap dat is
to get you ready for de Orleans market, so dat you will bring marser a
good price. How old is you?” addressing himself to a man not less than
forty.

“If I live to see next sweet-potato-digging time, I shall be either
forty or forty-five, I don't know which.”

“Dat may be,” replied Pompey; “but now you is only thirty years
old,--dat's what marser says you is to be.”

“I know I is more den dat,” responded the man.

“I can't help nuffin' about dat,” returned Pompey; “but when you get
into de market and any one ax you how old you is, and you tell um you is
forty or forty-five, marser will tie you up and cut you all to pieces.
But if you tell um dat you is only thirty, den he won't. Now remember
dat you is thirty years old and no more.”

“Well den, I guess I will only be thirty when dey ax me.”

“What's your name?” said Pompey, addressing himself to another.

“Jeems.”

“Oh! Uncle Jim, is it?” “Yes.”

“Den you must have all them gray whiskers shaved off, and all dem gray
hairs plucked out of your head.” This was all said by Pompey in a manner
which showed that he knew what he was about.

“How old is you?” asked Pompey of a tall, strong-looking man. “What's
your name?”

“I am twenty-nine years old, and my name is Tobias, but they calls me
Toby.”

“Well, Toby, or Mr. Tobias, if dat will suit you better, you are now
twenty-three years old; dat's all,--do you understand dat?”

“Yes,” replied Toby.

Pompey now gave them all to understand how old they were to be when
asked by persons who were likely to purchase, and then went and reported
to his master that the old boys were all right.

“Be sure,” said Jennings, “that the niggers don't forget what you have
taught them, for our luck this time in the market depends upon their
appearance. If any of them have so many gray hairs that you cannot pluck
them out, take the blacking and brush, and go at them.”




CHAPTER IV. THE BOAT-RACE


AT eight o'clock, on the evening of the third day of the passage, the
lights of another steamer were seen in the distance, and apparently
coming up very fast. This was the signal for a general commotion on
board the Patriot, and everything indicated that a steamboat-race was
at hand. Nothing can exceed the excitement attendant upon the racing of
steamers on the Mississippi.

By the time the boats had reached Memphis they were side by side, and
each exerting itself to get in advance of the other. The night was
clear, the moon shining brightly, and the boats so near to each other
that the passengers were within speaking distance. On board the Patriot
the firemen were using oil, lard, butter, and even bacon, with wood, for
the purpose of raising the steam to its highest pitch. The blaze mingled
with the black smoke that issued from the pipes of the other boat, which
showed that she also was burning something more combustible than wood.

The firemen of both boats, who were slaves, were singing songs such
as can only be heard on board a Southern steamer. The boats now came
abreast of each other, and nearer and nearer, until they were locked
so that men could pass from one to the other. The wildest excitement
prevailed among the men employed on the steamers, in which the
passengers freely participated.

The Patriot now stopped to take in passengers, but still no steam was
permitted to escape. On the starting of the boat again, cold water
was forced into the boilers by the feed-pumps, and, as might have been
expected, one of the boilers exploded with terrific force, carrying away
the boiler-deck and tearing to pieces much of the machinery. One dense
fog of steam filled every part of the vessel, while shrieks, groans,
and cries were heard on every side. Men were running hither and thither
looking for their wives, and women were flying about in the wildest
confusion seeking for their husbands. Dismay appeared on every
countenance.

The saloons and cabins soon looked more like hospitals than anything
else; but by this time the Patriot had drifted to the shore, and the
other steamer had come alongside to render assistance to the disabled
boat. The killed and wounded (nineteen in number) were put on shore,
and the Patriot, taken in tow by the Washington, was once more on her
journey.

It was half-past twelve, and the passengers, instead of retiring to
their berths, once more assembled at the gambling-tables. The practice
of gambling on the western waters has long been a source of annoyance
to the more moral persons who travel on our great rivers. Thousands
of dollars often change owners during a passage from St. Louis or
Louisville to New Orleans, on a Mississippi steamer. Many men
are completely ruined on such occasions, and duels are often the
consequence.

“Go call my boy, steward,” said Mr. Jones, as he took his cards one by
one from the table.

In a few minutes a fine-looking, bright-eyed mulatto boy, apparently
about sixteen years of age, was standing by his master's side at the
table.

“I am broke, all but my boy,” said Jones, as he ran his fingers through
his cards; “but he is worth a thousand dollars, and I will bet the half
of him.”

“I will call you,” said Thompson, as he laid five hundred dollars at
the feet of the boy, who was standing on the table, and at the same time
throwing down his cards before his adversary.

“You have beaten me,” said Jones; and a roar of laughter followed from
the other gentleman as poor Joe stepped down from the table.

“Well, I suppose I owe you half the nigger,” said Thompson, as he took
hold of Joe and began examining his limbs.

“Yes,” replied Jones, “he is half yours. Let me have five hundred
dollars, and I will give you a bill of sale of the boy.”

“Go back to your bed,” said Thompson to his chattel, “and remember that
you now belong to me.”

The poor slave wiped the tears from his eyes, as, in obedience, he
turned to leave the table.

“My father gave me that boy,” said Jones, as he took the money, “and I
hope, Mr. Thompson, that you will allow me to redeem him.”

“Most certainly, sir,” replied Thompson. “Whenever you hand over the
cool thousand the negro is yours.”

Next morning, as the passengers were assembling in the cabin and on
deck, and while the slaves were running about waiting on or looking for
their masters, poor Joe was seen entering his new master's stateroom,
boots in hand.

“Who do you belong to?” inquired a gentleman of an old negro, who passed
along leading a fine Newfoundland dog which he had been feeding.

“When I went to sleep las' night,” replied the slave, “I 'longed to
Massa Carr; but he bin gamblin' all night, an' I don't know who I 'longs
to dis mornin'.”

Such is the uncertainty of a slave's life. He goes to bed at night
the pampered servant of his young master, with whom he has played
in childhood, and who would not see his slave abused under any
consideration, and gets up in the morning the property of a man whom he
has never before seen.

To behold five or six tables in the saloon of a steamer, with half a
dozen men playing cards at each, with money, pistols, and bowie-knives
spread in splendid confusion before them, is an ordinary thing on the
Mississippi River.




CHAPTER V. THE YOUNG MOTHER


ON the fourth morning, the Patriot landed at Grand Gulf, a beautiful
town on the left bank of the Mississippi. Among the numerous passengers
who came on board at Rodney was another slave-trader, with nine human
chattels which he was conveying to the Southern market. The passengers,
both ladies and gentlemen, were startled at seeing among the new lot
of slaves a woman so white as not to be distinguishable from the other
white women on board. She had in her arms a child so white that no one
would suppose a drop of African blood flowed through its blue veins.

No one could behold that mother with her helpless babe, without feeling
that God would punish the oppressor. There she sat, with an expressive
and intellectual forehead, and a countenance full of dignity and
heroism, her dark golden locks rolled back from her almost snow-white
forehead and floating over her swelling bosom. The tears that stood in
her mild blue eyes showed that she was brooding over sorrows and wrongs
that filled her bleeding heart.

The hearts of the passers-by grew softer, while gazing upon that young
mother as she pressed sweet kisses on the sad, smiling lips of the
infant that lay in her lap. The small, dimpled hands of the innocent
creature were slyly hid in the warm bosom on which the little one
nestled. The blood of some proud Southerner, no doubt, flowed through
the veins of that child.

When the boat arrived at Natches, a rather good-looking,
genteel-appearing man came on board to purchase a servant. This
individual introduced himself to Jennings as the Rev. James Wilson. The
slave-trader conducted the preacher to the deck-cabin, where he kept
his slaves, and the man of God, after having some questions answered,
selected Agnes as the one best suited to his service.

It seemed as if poor Marion's heart would break when she found that she
was to be separated from her mother. The preacher, however, appeared to
be but little moved by their sorrow, and took his newly-purchased victim
on shore. Agnes begged him to buy her daughter, but he refused, on the
ground that he had no use for her.

During the remainder of the passage, Marion wept bitterly.

After a run of a few hours, the boat stopped at Baton Rouge, where an
additional number of passengers were taken on board, among whom were
a number of persons who had been attending the races at that place.
Gambling and drinking were now the order of the day.

The next morning, at ten o'clock, the boat arrived at New Orleans, where
the passengers went to their hotels and homes, and the negroes to the
slave-pens.

Lizzie, the white slave-mother, of whom we have already spoken, created
as much of a sensation by the fairness of her complexion and the
alabaster whiteness of her child, when being conveyed on shore at New
Orleans, as she had done when brought on board at Grand Gulf. Every one
that saw her felt that slavery in the Southern States was not confined
to the negro. Many had been taught to think that slavery was a benefit
rather than an injury, and those who were not opposed to the institution
before, now felt that if whites were to become its victims, it was time
at least that some security should be thrown around the Anglo-Saxon to
save him from this servile and degraded position.




CHAPTER VI. THE SLAVE-MARKET.

NOT far from Canal Street, in the city of New Orleans, stands a large
two-story, flat building, surrounded by a stone wall some twelve feet
high, the top of which is covered with bits of glass, and so constructed
as to prevent even the possibility of any one's passing over it without
sustaining great injury. Many of the rooms in this building resemble the
cells of a prison, and in a small apartment near the “office” are to
be seen any number of iron collars, hobbles, handcuffs, thumbscrews,
cowhides, chains, gags, and yokes.

A back-yard, enclosed by a high wall, looks something like the
playground attached to one of our large New England schools, in which
are rows of benches and swings. Attached to the back premises is a
good-sized kitchen, where, at the time of which we write, two old
negresses were at work, stewing, boiling, and baking, and occasionally
wiping the perspiration from their furrowed and swarthy brows.

The slave-trader, Jennings, on his arrival at New Orleans, took up his
quarters here with his gang of human cattle, and the morning after,
at 10 o'clock, they were exhibited for sale. First of all came the
beautiful Marion, whose pale countenance and dejected look told how
many sad hours she had passed since parting with her mother at Natchez.
There, too, was a poor woman who had been separated from her husband;
and another woman, whose looks and manners were expressive of deep
anguish, sat by her side. There was “Uncle Jeems,” with his whiskers
off, his face shaven clean, and the gray hairs plucked out, ready to be
sold for ten years younger than he was. Toby was also there, with his
face shaven and greased, ready for inspection.

The examination commenced, and was carried on in such a manner as to
shock the feelings of any one not entirely devoid of the milk of human
kindness.

“What are you wiping your eyes for?” inquired a far, red-faced man, with
a white hat set on one side of his head and a cigar in his mouth, of a
woman who sat on one of the benches.

“Because I left my man behind.”

“Oh, if I buy you, I will furnish you with a better man than you left.
I've got lots of young bucks on my farm.”

“I don't want and never will have another man,” replied the woman.

“What's you name?” asked a man in a straw hat of a tall negro who stood
with his arms folded across his breast, leaning against the wall.

“My name is Aaron, sar.”

“How old are you?”

“Twenty-five.”

“Where were you raised?”

“In old Virginny, sar.”

“How many men have owned you?”

“Four.”

“Do you enjoy good health?”

“Yes, sar.”

“How long did you live with your first owner?”

“Twenty years.”

“Did you ever run away?”

“No, sar.”

“Did you ever strike your master?”

“No, sar.”

“Were you ever whipped much?”

“No, sar; I s'pose I didn't desarve it, sar.”

“How long did you live with your second master?”

“Ten years, sar.”

“Have you a good appetite?”

“Yes, sar.”

“Can you eat your allowance?”

“Yes, sar,--when I can get it.”

“Where were you employed in Virginia?”

“I worked de tobacker fiel'.”

“In the tobacco field, eh?”

“Yes, sar.”

“How old did you say you was?”

“Twenty-five, sar, nex' sweet-'tater-diggin' time.”

“I am a cotton-planter, and if I buy you, you will have to work in the
cotton-field. My men pick one hundred and fifty pounds a day, and the
women one hundred and forty pounds; and those who fail to perform their
task receive five stripes for each pound that is wanting. Now, do you
think you could keep up with the rest of the hands?”

“I don't know, sar, but I 'specs I'd have to.”

“How long did you live with your third master?”

“Three years, sar.”

“Why, that makes you thirty-three. I thought you told me you were only
twenty-five?”

Aaron now looked first at the planter, then at the trader, and seemed
perfectly bewildered. He had forgotten the lesson given him by Pompey
relative to his age; and the planter's circuitous questions--doubtless
to find out the slave's real age--had thrown the negro off his guard.

“I must see you back, so as to know how much you have been whipped,
before I think of buying.”

Pompey, who had been standing by during the examination, thought that
his services were now required, and, stepping forth with a degree of
officiousness, said to Aaron,--

“Don't you hear de gemman tell you he wants to 'zamin you. Cum,
unharness yo'seff, ole boy, and don't be standin' dar.”

Aaron was soon examined, and pronounced “sound;” yet the conflicting
statement about his age was not satisfactory.

Fortunately for Marion, she was spared the pain of undergoing such an
examination. Mr. Cardney, a teller in one of the banks, had just been
married, and wanted a maid-servant for his wife, and, passing through
the market in the early part of the day, was pleased with the young
slave's appearance, and his dwelling the quadroon found a much better
home than often falls to the lot of a slave sold in the New Orleans
market.




CHAPTER VII. THE SLAVE-HOLDING PARSON


THE Rev. James Wilson was a native of the State of Connecticut, where
he was educated for the ministry in the Methodist persuasion. His father
was a strict follower of John Wesley, and spared no pains in his son's
education, with the hope that he would one day be as renowned as the
leader of his sect. James had scarcely finished his education at New
Haven, when he was invited by an uncle, then on a visit to his father,
to spend a few months at Natchez in Mississippi. Young Wilson accepted
his uncle's invitation, and accompanied him to the South. Few young men,
and especially clergymen, going fresh from college to the South, but are
looked upon as geniuses in a small way, and who are not invited to all
the parties in the neighborhood. Mr. Wilson was not an exception to this
rule. The society into which he was thrown, on his arrival at Natchez,
was too brilliant for him not to be captivated by it, and, as might have
been expected, he succeeded in captivating a plantation with seventy
slaves if not the heart of the lady to whom it belonged.

Added to this, he became a popular preacher, and had a large
congregation with a snug salary. Like other planters, Mr. Wilson
confided the care of his farm to Ned Huckelby, an overseer of high
reputation in his way.

The Poplar Farm, as it was called, was situated in a beautiful valley,
nine miles from Natchez, and near the Mississippi River. The once
unshorn face of nature had given way, and the farm now blossomed with
a splendid harvest. The neat cottage stood in a grove, where Lombardy
poplars lift their tops almost to prop the skies, where the willow,
locust, and horse-chestnut trees spread forth their branches, and
flowers never ceased to blossom.

This was the parson's country residence, where the family spent only two
months during the year. His town residence was a fine villa, seated on
the brow of a hill, at the edge of the city.

It was in the kitchen of this house that Agnes found her new home. Mr.
Wilson was every inch a democrat, and early resolved that “his people,”
 as he called his slaves, should be well-fed and not over-worked, and
therefore laid down the law and gospel to the overseer as well as to the
slaves. “It is my wish,” said he to Mr. Carlingham, an old school-fellow
who was spending a few days with him,--“It is my wish that a new system
be adopted on the plantations in this State. I believe that the sons of
Ham should have the gospel, and I intend that mine shall have it. The
gospel is calculated to make mankind better and none should be without
it.”

“What say you,” said Carlingham, “about the right of man to his
liberty?”

“Now, Carlingham, you have begun to harp again about men's rights. I
really wish that you could see this matter as I do.”

“I regret that I cannot see eye to eye with you,” said Carlingham. “I
am a disciple of Rousseau, and have for years made the rights of man my
study, and I must confess to you that I see no difference between white
and black, as it regards liberty.”

“Now, my dear Carlingham, would you really have the negroes enjoy the
same rights as ourselves?”

“I would most certainly. Look at our great Declaration of Independence!
look even at the Constitution of our own Connecticut, and see what is
said in these about liberty.” “I regard all this talk about rights as
mere humbug. The Bible is older than the Declaration of Independence,
and there I take my stand.”

A long discussion followed, in which both gentlemen put forth their
peculiar ideas with much warmth of feeling.

During this conversation, there was another person in the room, seated
by the window, who, although at work, embroidering a fine collar, paid
minute attention to what was said. This was Georgiana, the only daughter
of the parson, who had but just returned from Connecticut, where she had
finished her education. She had had the opportunity of contrasting the
spirit of Christianity and liberty in New England with that of slavery
in her native State, and had learned to feel deeply for the injured
negro.

Georgiana was in her nineteenth year, and had been much benefited by her
residence of five years at the North. Her form was tall and graceful,
her features regular and well-defined, and her complexion was
illuminated by the freshness of youth, beauty, and health.

The daughter differed from both the father and visitor upon the subject
which they had been discussing; and as soon as an opportunity offered,
she gave it as her opinion that the Bible was both the bulwark of
Christianity and of liberty. With a smile she said,--

“Of course, papa will overlook my difference with him, for although I am
a native of the South, I am by education and sympathy a Northerner.”

Mr. Wilson laughed, appearing rather pleased than otherwise at the
manner in which his daughter had expressed herself. From this Georgiana
took courage and continued,--

“'Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.' This single passage of
Scripture should cause us to have respect for the rights of the slave.
True Christian love is of an enlarged and disinterested nature. It loves
all who love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, without regard to color
or condition.”

“Georgiana, my dear, you are an abolitionist,--your talk is fanaticism!”
 said Mr. Wilson, in rather a sharp tone; but the subdued look of the
girl and the presence of Carlingham caused him to soften his language.

Mr. Wilson having lost his wife by consumption, and Georgiana being
his only child, he loved her too dearly to say more, even if he felt
disposed. A silence followed this exhortation from the young Christian,
but her remarks had done a noble work. The father's heart was touched,
and the sceptic, for the first time, was viewing Christianity in its
true light.





CHAPTER VIII. A NIGHT IN THE PARSON'S KITCHEN


BESIDES Agnes, whom Mr. Wilson had purchased from the slave-trader,
Jennings, he kept a number of house-servants. The chief one of these
was Sam, who must be regarded as second only to the parson himself. If
a dinner-party was in contemplation, or any company was to be invited,
after all the arrangements had been talked over by the minister and his
daughter, Sam was sure to be consulted on the subject by “Miss Georgy,”
 as Miss Wilson was called by all the servants. If furniture, crockery,
or anything was to be purchased, Sam felt that he had been slighted if
his opinion was not asked. As to the marketing, he did it all. He sat
at the head of the servants' table in the kitchen, and was master of
the ceremonies. A single look from him was enough to silence any
conversation or noise among the servants in the kitchen or in any other
part of the premises.

There is in the Southern States a great amount of prejudice in regard
to color, even among the negroes themselves. The nearer the negro
or mulatto approaches to the white, the more he seems to feel his
superiority over those of a darker hue. This is no doubt the result of
the prejudice that exists on the part of the whites against both the
mulattoes and the blacks.

Sam was originally from Kentucky, and through the instrumentality of one
of his young masters, whom he had to take to school, he had learned
to read so as to be well understood, and, owing to that fact, was
considered a prodigy, not only among his own master's slaves, but also
among those of the town who knew him. Sam had a great wish to follow in
the footsteps of his master and be a poet, and was therefore often heard
singing doggerels of his own composition.

But there was one drawback to Sam, and that was his color. He was one
of the blackest of his race. This he evidently regarded as a great
misfortune; but he endeavored to make up for it in dress. Mr. Wilson
kept his house-servants well dressed, and as for Sam, he was seldom seen
except in a ruffled shirt. Indeed, the washerwoman feared him more than
any one else in the house.

Agnes had been inaugurated chief of the kitchen department, and had
a general supervision of the household affairs. Alfred, the coachman,
Peter, and Hetty made up the remainder of the house-servants. Besides
these, Mr. Wilson owned eight slaves who were masons. These worked in
the city. Being mechanics, they were let out to greater advantage than
to keep them on the farm.

Every Sunday evening, Mr. Wilson's servants, including the brick-layers,
assembled in the kitchen, where the events of the week were fully
discussed and commented upon. It was on a Sunday evening, in the month
of June, that there was a party at Mr. Wilson's house, and, according to
custom in the Southern States, the ladies had their maid-servants with
them. Tea had been served in “the house,” and the servants, including
the strangers, had taken their seats at the table in the kitchen. Sam,
being a “single gentleman,” was unusually attentive to the “ladies” on
this occasion. He seldom let a day pass without spending an hour or two
in combing and brushing his “har.” He had an idea that fresh butter
was better for his hair than any other kind of grease, and therefore on
churning days half a pound of butter had always to be taken out before
it was salted. When he wished to appear to great advantage, he would
grease his face to make it “shiny.” Therefore, on the evening of the
party, when all the servants were at the table, Sam cut a big figure.
There he sat, with his wool well combed and buttered, face nicely
greased, and his ruffles extending five or six inches from his bosom.
The parson in his drawing-room did not make a more imposing appearance
than did his servant on this occasion.

“I jis bin had my fortune tole last Sunday night,” said Sam, while
helping one of the girls.

“Indeed!” cried half a dozen voices.

“Yes,” continued he; “Aunt Winny tole me I's to hab de prettiest yallah
gal in de town, and dat I's to be free!”

All eyes were immediately turned toward Sally Johnson, who was seated
near Sam.

“I 'specs I see somebody blush at dat remark,” said Alfred.

“Pass dem pancakes an' 'lasses up dis way, Mr. Alf., and none ob your
'sinuwashuns here,” rejoined Sam.

“Dat reminds me,” said Agnes, “dat Dorcas Simpson is gwine to git
married.”

“Who to, I want to know?” inquired Peter.

“To one of Mr. Darby's field-hands,” answered Agnes.

“I should tink dat gal wouldn't frow herseff away in dat ar way,” said
Sally. “She's good lookin' 'nough to git a house-servant, and not hab to
put up wid a field-nigger.

“Yes,” said Sam, “dat's a werry unsensible remark ob yourn, Miss Sally.
I admires your judgment werry much, I 'sures you. Dar's plenty ob
susceptible an' well-dressed house-serbants dat a gal ob her looks can
git widout takin' up wid dem common darkies.”

The evening's entertainment concluded by Sam's relating a little of his
own experience while with his first master, in old Kentucky. This master
was a doctor, and had a large practice among his neighbors, doctoring
both masters and slaves. When Sam was about fifteen years old, his
master set him to grinding up ointment and making pills. As the young
student grew older and became more practised in his profession, his
services were of more importance to the doctor. The physician having
a good business, and a large number of his patients being slaves,--the
most of whom had to call on the doctor when ill,--he put Sam to
bleeding, pulling teeth, and administering medicine to the slaves. Sam
soon acquired the name among the slaves of the “Black Doctor.” With this
appellation he was delighted; and no regular physician could have put on
more airs than did the black doctor when his services were required. In
bleeding, he must have more bandages, and would rub and smack the arm
more than the doctor would have thought of.

Sam was once seen taking out a tooth for one of his patients, and
nothing appeared more amusing. He got the poor fellow down on his back,
and then getting astride of his chest, he applied the turnkeys and
pulled away for dear life. Unfortunately, he had got hold of the wrong
tooth, and the poor man screamed as loud as he could; but it was to no
purpose, for Sam had him fast, and after a pretty severe tussle out came
the sound grinder. The young doctor now saw his mistake, but consoled
himself with the thought that as the wrong tooth was out of the way,
there was more room to get at the right one.

Bleeding and a dose of calomel were always considered indispensable
by the “old boss,” and as a matter of course, Sam followed in his
footsteps.

On one occasion the old doctor was ill himself, so as to be unable to
attend to his patients. A slave, with pass in hand, called to receive
medical advice, and the master told Sam to examine him and see what
he wanted. This delighted him beyond measure, for although he had been
acting his part in the way of giving out medicine as the master ordered
it, he had never been called upon by the latter to examine a patient,
and this seemed to convince him after all that he was no sham doctor. As
might have been expected, he cut a rare figure in his first examination.
Placing himself directly opposite his patient, and folding his arms
across his breast, looking very knowingly, he began,--

“What's de matter wid you?”

“I is sick.”

“Where is you sick?”

“Here,” replied the man, putting his hand upon his stomach.

“Put out your tongue,” continued the doctor.

The man ran out his tongue at full length.

“Let me feel your pulse;” at the same time taking his patient's hand in
his, and placing his fingers upon his pulse, he said,--

“Ah! your case is a bad one; ef I don't do something for you, and dat
pretty quick, you'll be a gone coon, and dat's sartin.” At this the
man appeared frightened, and inquired what was the matter with him, in
answer to which Sam said,--

“I done told dat your case is a bad one, and dat's enuff.”

On Sam's returning to his master's bedside, the latter said,--

“Well, Sam, what do you think is the matter with him?”

“His stomach is out ob order, sar,” he replied.

“What do you think had better be done for him?”

“I tink I'd better bleed him and gib him a dose ob calomel,” returned
Sam.

So, to the latter's gratification, the master let him have his own way.

On one occasion, when making pills and ointment, Sam made a great
mistake. He got the preparations for both mixed together, so that he
could not legitimately make either. But fearing that if he threw the
stuff away, his master would flog him, and being afraid to inform his
superior of the mistake, he resolved to make the whole batch of pill and
ointment stuff into pills. He well knew that the powder over the pills
would hide the inside, and the fact that most persons shut their eyes
when taking such medicine led the young doctor to feel that all would
be right in the end. Therefore Sam made his pills, boxed them up, put
on the labels, and placed them in a conspicuous position on one of the
shelves.

Sam felt a degree of anxiety about his pills, however. It was a strange
mixture, and he was not certain whether it would kill or cure; but he
was willing that it should be tried. At last the young doctor had his
vanity gratified. Col. Tallen, one of Dr. Saxondale's patients, drove up
one morning, and Sam as usual ran out to the gate to hold the colonel's
horse.

“Call your master,” said the colonel; “I will not get out.”

The doctor was soon beside the carriage, and inquired about the health
of his patient. After a little consultation, the doctor returned to
his office, took down a box of Sam's new pills, and returned to the
carriage.

“Take two of these every morning and night,” said the doctor, “and if
you don't feel relieved, double the dose.”

“Good gracious,” exclaimed Sam in an undertone, when he heard his master
tell the colonel how to take the pills.

It was several days before Sam could learn the result of his new
medicine. One afternoon, about a fortnight after the colonel's visit,
Sam saw his master's patient riding up to the gate on horseback. The
doctor happened to be in the yard, and met the colonel and said,--

“How are you now?”

“I am entirely recovered,” replied the patient. “Those pills of yours
put me on my feet the next day.”

“I knew they would,” rejoined the doctor.

Sam was near enough to hear the conversation, and was delighted beyond
description. The negro immediately ran into the kitchen, amongst his
companions, and commenced dancing.

“What de matter wid you?” inquired the cook.

“I is de greatest doctor in his country,” replied Sam. “Ef you ever get
sick, call on me. No matter what ails you, I is de man dat can cure you
in no time. If you do hab de backache, de rheumatics, de headache, de
coller morbus, fits, er any ting else, Sam is de gentleman dat can put
you on your feet wid his pills.”

For a long time after, Sam did little else than boast of his skill as a
doctor.

We have said that the “black doctor” was full of wit and good sense.
Indeed, in that respect, he had scarcely an equal in the neighborhood.
Although his master resided some little distance out of the city, Sam
was always the first man in all the negro balls and parties in town.
When his master could give him a pass, he went, and when he did not give
him one, he would steal away after his master had retired, and run the
risk of being taken up by the night-watch. Of course, the master never
knew anything of the absence of the servant at night without permission.
As the negroes at these parties tried to excel each other in the way of
dress, Sam was often at a loss to make that appearance that his heart
desired, but his ready wit ever helped him in this. When his master had
retired to bed at night, it was the duty of Sam to put out the lights,
and take out with him his master's clothes and boots, and leave them in
the office until morning, and then black the boots, brush the clothes,
and return them to his master's room.

Having resolved to attend a dress-ball one night, without his master's
permission, and being perplexed for suitable garments, Sam determined to
take his master's. So, dressing himself in the doctor's clothes, even
to his boots and hat, off the negro started for the city. Being well
acquainted with the usual walk of the patrols he found no difficulty in
keeping out of their way. As might have been expected, Sam was the great
gun with the ladies that night.

The next morning, Sam was back home long before his master's time for
rising, and the clothes were put in their accustomed place. For a long
time Sam had no difficulty in attiring himself for parties; but the old
proverb that “It is a long lane that has no turning,” was verified in
the negro's case. One stormy night, when the rain was descending in
torrents, the doctor heard a rap at his door. It was customary with him,
when called up at night to visit a patient, to ring for Sam. But this
time, the servant was nowhere to be found. The doctor struck a light and
looked for clothes; they, too, were gone. It was twelve o'clock, and
the doctor's clothes, hat, boots, and even his watch, were nowhere to be
found. Here was a pretty dilemma for a doctor to be in. It was some time
before the physician could fit himself out so as to make the visit. At
last, however, he started with one of the farm-horses, for Sam had taken
the doctor's best saddle-horse. The doctor felt sure that the negro had
robbed him, and was on his way to Canada; but in this he was mistaken.
Sam had gone to the city to attend a ball, and had decked himself out in
his master's best suit. The physician returned before morning, and again
retired to bed but with little hope of sleep, for his thoughts were with
his servant and horse. At six o'clock, in walked Sam with his master's
clothes, and the boots neatly blacked. The watch was placed on the
shelf, and the hat in its place. Sam had not met any of the servants,
and was therefore entirely ignorant of what had occurred during his
absence.

“What have you been about, sir, and where was you last night when I was
called?” asked the doctor.

“I don't know, sir. I 'spose I was asleep,” replied Sam.

But the doctor was not to be so easily satisfied, after having been put
to so much trouble in hunting up another suit without the aid of Sam.
After breakfast, Sam was taken into the barn, tied up, and severely
flogged with the cat, which brought from him the truth concerning
his absence the previous night. This forever put an end to his fine
appearance at the negro parties. Had not the doctor been one of the most
indulgent of masters, he would not have escaped with merely a severe
whipping.

As a matter of course, Sam had to relate to his companions that evening
in Mr. Wilson's kitchen all his adventures as a physician while with his
old master.




CHAPTER IX. THE MAN OF HONOR


AUGUSTINE CARDINAY, the purchaser of Marion, was from the Green
Mountains of Vermont, and his feelings were opposed to the holding of
slaves; but his young wife persuaded him into the idea that it was no
worse to own a slave than to hire one and pay the money to another.
Hence it was that he had been induced to purchase Marion.

Adolphus Morton, a young physician from the same State, and who had just
commenced the practice of his profession in New Orleans, was boarding
with Cardinay when Marion was brought home. The young physician had been
in New Orleans but a very few weeks, and had seen but little of slavery.
In his own mountain-home, he had been taught that the slaves of the
Southern States were negroes, and if not from the coast of Africa, the
descendants of those who had been imported. He was unprepared to
behold with composure a beautiful white girl of sixteen in the degraded
position of a chattel slave.

The blood chilled in his young heart as he heard Cardinay tell how, by
bantering with the trader, he had bought her two hundred dollars less
than he first asked. His very looks showed that she had the deepest
sympathies of his heart.

Marion had been brought up by her mother to look after the domestic
concerns of her cottage in Virginia, and well knew how to perform the
duties imposed upon her. Mrs. Cardinay was much pleased with her new
servant, and often mentioned her good qualities in the presence of Mr.
Morton.

After eight months acquaintance with Marion, Morton's sympathies ripened
into love, which was most cordially reciprocated by the friendless and
injured child of sorrow. There was but one course which the young man
could honorably pursue, and that was to purchase Marion and make her
his lawful wife; and this he did immediately, for he found Mr. and Mrs.
Cardinay willing to second his liberal intentions.

The young man, after purchasing Marion from Cardinay, and marrying her,
took lodgings in another part of the city. A private teacher was called
in, and the young wife was taught some of those accomplishments so
necessary for one taking a high position in good society.

Dr. Morton soon obtained a large and influential practice in his
profession, and with it increased in wealth; but with all his wealth he
never owned a slave. Probably the fact that he had raised his wife from
that condition kept the hydra-headed system continually before him.
To the credit of Marion be it said, she used every means to obtain the
freedom of her mother, who had been sold to Parson Wilson, at Natchez.
Her efforts, however, had come too late; for Agnes had died of a fever
before the arrival of Dr. Morton's agent.

Marion found in Adolphus Morton a kind and affectionate husband; and his
wish to purchase her mother, although unsuccessful, had doubly endeared
him to her. Ere a year had elapsed from the time of their marriage, Mrs.
Morton presented her husband with a lovely daughter, who seemed to knit
their hearts still closer together. This child they named Jane; and
before the expiration of the second year, they were blessed with another
daughter, whom they named Adrika.

These children grew up to the ages of ten and eleven, and were then
sent to the North to finish their education, and receive that refinement
which young ladies cannot obtain in the Slave States.




CHAPTER X. THE QUADROON'S HOME


A FEW miles out of Richmond is a pleasant place, with here and there a
beautiful cottage surrounded by trees so as scarcely to be seen. Among
these was one far retired from the public roads, and almost hidden
among the trees. This was the spot that Henry Linwood had selected for
Isabella, the eldest daughter of Agnes. The young man hired the house,
furnished it, and placed his mistress there, and for many months no one
in his father's family knew where he spent his leisure hours.

When Henry was not with her, Isabella employed herself in looking after
her little garden and the flowers that grew in front of her cottage. The
passion-flower, peony, dahlia, laburnum, and other plants, so abundant
in warm climates, under the tasteful hand of Isabella, lavished their
beauty upon this retired spot, and miniature paradise.

Although Isabella had been assured by Henry that she should be free and
that he would always consider her as his wife, she nevertheless felt
that she ought to be married and acknowledged by him. But this was an
impossibility under the State laws, even had the young man been disposed
to do what was right in the matter. Related as he was, however, to one
of the first families in Virginia, he would not have dared to marry a
woman of so low an origin, even had the laws been favorable.

Here, in this secluded grove, unvisited by any other except her
lover, Isabella lived for years. She had become the mother of a lovely
daughter, which its father named Clotelle. The complexion of the child
was still fairer than that of its mother. Indeed, she was not darker
than other white children, and as she grew older she more and more
resembled her father.

As time passed away, Henry became negligent of Isabella and his child,
so much so, that days and even weeks passed without their seeing him,
or knowing where he was. Becoming more acquainted with the world, and
moving continually in the society of young women of his own station,
the young man felt that Isabella was a burden to him, and having as
some would say, “outgrown his love,” he longed to free himself of the
responsibility; yet every time he saw the child, he felt that he owed it
his fatherly care.

Henry had now entered into political life, and been elected to a seat
in the legislature of his native State; and in his intercourse with his
friends had become acquainted with Gertrude Miller, the daughter of a
wealthy gentleman living near Richmond. Both Henry and Gertrude were
very good-looking, and a mutual attachment sprang up between them.

Instead of finding fault with the unfrequent visits of Henry, Isabella
always met him with a smile, and tried to make both him and herself
believe that business was the cause of his negligence. When he was with
her, she devoted every moment of her time to him, and never failed to
speak of the growth and increasing intelligence of Clotelle.

The child had grown so large as to be able to follow its father on his
departure out to the road. But the impression made on Henry's feelings
by the devoted woman and her child was momentary. His heart had grown
hard, and his acts were guided by no fixed principle. Henry and Gertrude
had been married nearly two years before Isabella knew anything of the
event, and it was merely by accident that she became acquainted with the
facts.

One beautiful afternoon, when Isabella and Clotelle were picking wild
strawberries some two miles from their home, and near the road-side,
they observed a one-horse chaise driving past. The mother turned her
face from the carriage not wishing to be seen by strangers, little
dreaming that the chaise contained Henry and his wife. The child,
however, watched the chaise, and startled her mother by screaming out
at the top of her voice, “Papa! papa!” and clapped her little hands for
joy. The mother turned in haste to look at the strangers, and her eyes
encountered those of Henry's pale and dejected countenance. Gertrude's
eyes were on the child. The swiftness with which Henry drove by could
not hide from his wife the striking resemblance of the child to himself.
The young wife had heard the child exclaim “Papa! papa!” and she
immediately saw by the quivering of his lips and the agitation depicted
in his countenance, that all was not right.

“Who is that woman? and why did that child call you papa?” she inquired,
with a trembling voice.

Henry was silent; he knew not what to say, and without another word
passing between them, they drove home.

On reaching her room, Gertrude buried her face in her handkerchief
and wept. She loved Henry, and when she had heard from the lips of her
companions how their husbands had proved false, she felt that he was an
exception, and fervently thanked God that she had been so blessed.

When Gertrude retired to her bed that night, the sad scene of the day
followed her. The beauty of Isabella, with her flowing curls, and the
look of the child, so much resembling the man whom she so dearly loved,
could not be forgotten; and little Clotelle's exclamation of “Papa!
papa!” rang in her ears during the whole night.

The return of Henry at twelve o'clock did not increase her happiness.
Feeling his guilt, he had absented himself from the house since his
return from the ride.





CHAPTER XI. TO-DAY A MISTRESS, TO-MORROW A SLAVE


THE night was dark, the rain descended in torrents from the black and
overhanging clouds, and the thunder, accompanied with vivid flashes of
lightning, resounded fearfully, as Henry Linwood stepped from his chaise
and entered Isabella's cottage.

More than a fortnight had elapsed since the accidental meeting, and
Isabella was in doubt as to who the lady was that Henry was with in the
carriage. Little, however, did she think that it was his wife. With a
smile, Isabella met the young man as he entered her little dwelling.
Clotelle had already gone to bed, but her father's voice aroused her
from her sleep, and she was soon sitting on his knee.

The pale and agitated countenance of Henry betrayed his uneasiness, but
Isabella's mild and laughing allusion to the incident of their meeting
him on the day of his pleasure-drive, and her saying, “I presume, dear
Henry, that the lady was one of your relatives,” led him to believe that
she was still in ignorance of his marriage. She was, in fact, ignorant
who the lady was who accompanied the man she loved on that eventful day.
He, aware of this, now acted more like himself, and passed the thing off
as a joke. At heart, however, Isabella felt uneasy, and this uneasiness
would at times show itself to the young man. At last, and with a great
effort, she said,--

“Now, hear Henry, if I am in the way of your future happiness, say so,
and I will release you from any promises that you have made me. I know
there is no law by which I can hold you, and if there was, I would
not resort to it. You are as dear to me as ever, and my thoughts shall
always be devoted to you. It would be a great sacrifice for me to give
you up to another, but if it be your desire, as great as the sacrifice
is, I will make it. Send me and your child into a Free State if we are
in your way.”

Again and again Linwood assured her that no woman possessed his love
but her. Oh, what falsehood and deceit man can put on when dealing with
woman's love!

The unabated storm kept Henry from returning home until after the
clock had struck two, and as he drew near his residence he saw his wife
standing at the window. Giving his horse in charge of the servant who
was waiting, he entered the house, and found his wife in tears. Although
he had never satisfied Gertrude as to who the quadroon woman and child
were, he had kept her comparatively easy by his close attention to
her, and by telling her that she was mistaken in regard to the child's
calling him “papa.” His absence that night, however, without any
apparent cause, had again aroused the jealousy of Gertrude; but Henry
told her that he had been caught in the rain while out, which prevented
his sooner returning, and she, anxious to believe him, received the
story as satisfactory.

Somewhat heated with brandy, and wearied with much loss of sleep,
Linwood fell into a sound slumber as soon as he retired. Not so with
Gertrude. That faithfulness which has ever distinguished her sex, and
the anxiety with which she watched all his movements, kept the wife
awake while the husband slept. His sleep, though apparently sound, was
nevertheless uneasy. Again and again she heard him pronounce the name
of Isabella, and more than once she heard him say, “I am not married;
I will never marry while you live.” Then he would speak the name of
Clotelle and say, “My dear child, how I love you!”

After a sleepless night, Gertrude arose from her couch, resolved that
she would reveal the whole matter to her mother. Mrs. Miller was a woman
of little or no feeling, proud, peevish, and passionate, thus making
everybody miserable that came near her; and when she disliked any
one, her hatred knew no bounds. This Gertrude knew; and had she not
considered it her duty, she would have kept the secret locked in her own
heart.

During the day, Mrs. Linwood visited her mother and told her all that
had happened. The mother scolded the daughter for not having informed
her sooner, and immediately determined to find out who the woman and
child were that Gertrude had met on the day of her ride. Three days were
spent by Mrs. Miller in this endeavor, but without success.

Four weeks had elapsed, and the storm of the old lady's temper had
somewhat subsided, when, one evening, as she was approaching her
daughter's residence, she saw Henry walking in the direction of where
the quadroon was supposed to reside. Being satisfied that the young
man had not seen her, the old woman at once resolved to follow him.
Linwood's boots squeaked so loudly that Mrs. Miller had no difficulty in
following him without being herself observed.

After a walk of about two miles, the young man turned into a narrow and
unfrequented road, and soon entered the cottage occupied by Isabella. It
was a fine starlight night, and the moon was just rising when they got
to their journey's end. As usual, Isabella met Henry with a smile, and
expressed her fears regarding his health.

Hours passed, and still old Mrs. Miller remained near the house,
determined to know who lived there. When she undertook to ferret out
anything, she bent her whole energies to it. As Michael Angelo, who
subjected all things to his pursuit and the idea he had formed of it,
painted the crucifixion by the side of a writhing slave and would have
broken up the true cross for pencils, so Mrs. Miller would have entered
the sepulchre, if she could have done it, in search of an object she
wished to find.

The full moon had risen, and was pouring its beams upon surrounding
objects as Henry stepped from Isabella's door, and looking at his watch,
said,--

“I must go, dear; it is now half-past ten.”

Had little Clotelle been awake, she too would have been at the door. As
Henry walked to the gate, Isabella followed with her left hand locked in
his. Again he looked at his watch, and said,--

“I must go.”

“It is more than a year since you staid all night,” murmured Isabella,
as he folded her convulsively in his arms,