The Project Gutenberg eBook of Herland
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Herland

Author: Charlotte Perkins Gilman


        
Release date: June 27, 2008 [eBook #32]
                Most recently updated: September 17, 2025

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/32


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HERLAND ***




HERLAND

by Charlotte Perkins Stetson Gilman




CHAPTER 1.
A Not Unnatural Enterprise


This is written from memory, unfortunately. If I could have brought with
me the material I so carefully prepared, this would be a very different
story. Whole books full of notes, carefully copied records, firsthand
descriptions, and the pictures--that’s the worst loss. We had some
bird’s-eyes of the cities and parks; a lot of lovely views of streets,
of buildings, outside and in, and some of those gorgeous gardens, and,
most important of all, of the women themselves.

Nobody will ever believe how they looked. Descriptions aren’t any good
when it comes to women, and I never was good at descriptions anyhow. But
it’s got to be done somehow; the rest of the world needs to know about
that country.

I haven’t said where it was for fear some self-appointed missionaries,
or traders, or land-greedy expansionists, will take it upon themselves
to push in. They will not be wanted, I can tell them that, and will fare
worse than we did if they do find it.

It began this way. There were three of us, classmates and friends--Terry
O. Nicholson (we used to call him the Old Nick, with good reason), Jeff
Margrave, and I, Vandyck Jennings.

We had known each other years and years, and in spite of our differences
we had a good deal in common. All of us were interested in science.

Terry was rich enough to do as he pleased. His great aim was
exploration. He used to make all kinds of a row because there was
nothing left to explore now, only patchwork and filling in, he said. He
filled in well enough--he had a lot of talents--great on mechanics and
electricity. Had all kinds of boats and motorcars, and was one of the
best of our airmen.

We never could have done the thing at all without Terry.

Jeff Margrave was born to be a poet, a botanist--or both--but his folks
persuaded him to be a doctor instead. He was a good one, for his age,
but his real interest was in what he loved to call “the wonders of
science.”

As for me, sociology’s my major. You have to back that up with a lot of
other sciences, of course. I’m interested in them all.

Terry was strong on facts--geography and meteorology and those; Jeff
could beat him any time on biology, and I didn’t care what it was they
talked about, so long as it connected with human life, somehow. There
are few things that don’t.

We three had a chance to join a big scientific expedition. They needed
a doctor, and that gave Jeff an excuse for dropping his just opening
practice; they needed Terry’s experience, his machine, and his money;
and as for me, I got in through Terry’s influence.

The expedition was up among the thousand tributaries and enormous
hinterland of a great river, up where the maps had to be made, savage
dialects studied, and all manner of strange flora and fauna expected.

But this story is not about that expedition. That was only the merest
starter for ours.


My interest was first roused by talk among our guides. I’m quick at
languages, know a good many, and pick them up readily. What with that
and a really good interpreter we took with us, I made out quite a few
legends and folk myths of these scattered tribes.

And as we got farther and farther upstream, in a dark tangle of rivers,
lakes, morasses, and dense forests, with here and there an unexpected
long spur running out from the big mountains beyond, I noticed that more
and more of these savages had a story about a strange and terrible Woman
Land in the high distance.

“Up yonder,” “Over there,” “Way up”--was all the direction they could
offer, but their legends all agreed on the main point--that there was
this strange country where no men lived--only women and girl children.

None of them had ever seen it. It was dangerous, deadly, they said, for
any man to go there. But there were tales of long ago, when some brave
investigator had seen it--a Big Country, Big Houses, Plenty People--All
Women.

Had no one else gone? Yes--a good many--but they never came back. It was
no place for men--of that they seemed sure.

I told the boys about these stories, and they laughed at them. Naturally
I did myself. I knew the stuff that savage dreams are made of.

But when we had reached our farthest point, just the day before we all
had to turn around and start for home again, as the best of expeditions
must in time, we three made a discovery.

The main encampment was on a spit of land running out into the main
stream, or what we thought was the main stream. It had the same muddy
color we had been seeing for weeks past, the same taste.

I happened to speak of that river to our last guide, a rather superior
fellow with quick, bright eyes.

He told me that there was another river--“over there, short river, sweet
water, red and blue.”

I was interested in this and anxious to see if I had understood, so I
showed him a red and blue pencil I carried, and asked again.

Yes, he pointed to the river, and then to the southwestward.
“River--good water--red and blue.”

Terry was close by and interested in the fellow’s pointing.

“What does he say, Van?”

I told him.

Terry blazed up at once.

“Ask him how far it is.”

The man indicated a short journey; I judged about two hours, maybe
three.

“Let’s go,” urged Terry. “Just us three. Maybe we can really find
something. May be cinnabar in it.”

“May be indigo,” Jeff suggested, with his lazy smile.

It was early yet; we had just breakfasted; and leaving word that we’d
be back before night, we got away quietly, not wishing to be thought
too gullible if we failed, and secretly hoping to have some nice little
discovery all to ourselves.

It was a long two hours, nearer three. I fancy the savage could have
done it alone much quicker. There was a desperate tangle of wood and
water and a swampy patch we never should have found our way across
alone. But there was one, and I could see Terry, with compass and
notebook, marking directions and trying to place landmarks.

We came after a while to a sort of marshy lake, very big, so that the
circling forest looked quite low and dim across it. Our guide told us
that boats could go from there to our camp--but “long way--all day.”

This water was somewhat clearer than that we had left, but we could not
judge well from the margin. We skirted it for another half hour or so,
the ground growing firmer as we advanced, and presently we turned the
corner of a wooded promontory and saw a quite different country--a
sudden view of mountains, steep and bare.

“One of those long easterly spurs,” Terry said appraisingly. “May be
hundreds of miles from the range. They crop out like that.”

Suddenly we left the lake and struck directly toward the cliffs. We
heard running water before we reached it, and the guide pointed proudly
to his river.

It was short. We could see where it poured down a narrow vertical
cataract from an opening in the face of the cliff. It was sweet water.
The guide drank eagerly and so did we.

“That’s snow water,” Terry announced. “Must come from way back in the
hills.”

But as to being red and blue--it was greenish in tint. The guide seemed
not at all surprised. He hunted about a little and showed us a quiet
marginal pool where there were smears of red along the border; yes, and
of blue.

Terry got out his magnifying glass and squatted down to investigate.

“Chemicals of some sort--I can’t tell on the spot. Look to me like
dyestuffs. Let’s get nearer,” he urged, “up there by the fall.”

We scrambled along the steep banks and got close to the pool that foamed
and boiled beneath the falling water. Here we searched the border and
found traces of color beyond dispute. More--Jeff suddenly held up an
unlooked-for trophy.

It was only a rag, a long, raveled fragment of cloth. But it was a
well-woven fabric, with a pattern, and of a clear scarlet that the water
had not faded. No savage tribe that we had heard of made such fabrics.

The guide stood serenely on the bank, well pleased with our excitement.

“One day blue--one day red--one day green,” he told us, and pulled from
his pouch another strip of bright-hued cloth.

“Come down,” he said, pointing to the cataract. “Woman Country--up
there.”

Then we were interested. We had our rest and lunch right there and
pumped the man for further information. He could tell us only what the
others had--a land of women--no men--babies, but all girls. No place for
men--dangerous. Some had gone to see--none had come back.

I could see Terry’s jaw set at that. No place for men? Dangerous? He
looked as if he might shin up the waterfall on the spot. But the guide
would not hear of going up, even if there had been any possible method
of scaling that sheer cliff, and we had to get back to our party before
night.

“They might stay if we told them,” I suggested.

But Terry stopped in his tracks. “Look here, fellows,” he said. “This
is our find. Let’s not tell those cocky old professors. Let’s go on home
with ’em, and then come back--just us--have a little expedition of our
own.”

We looked at him, much impressed. There was something attractive to a
bunch of unattached young men in finding an undiscovered country of a
strictly Amazonian nature.

Of course we didn’t believe the story--but yet!

“There is no such cloth made by any of these local tribes,” I announced,
examining those rags with great care. “Somewhere up yonder they spin and
weave and dye--as well as we do.”

“That would mean a considerable civilization, Van. There couldn’t be
such a place--and not known about.”

“Oh, well, I don’t know. What’s that old republic up in the Pyrenees
somewhere--Andorra? Precious few people know anything about that, and
it’s been minding its own business for a thousand years. Then there’s
Montenegro--splendid little state--you could lose a dozen Montenegroes
up and down these great ranges.”

We discussed it hotly all the way back to camp. We discussed it with
care and privacy on the voyage home. We discussed it after that, still
only among ourselves, while Terry was making his arrangements.

He was hot about it. Lucky he had so much money--we might have had to
beg and advertise for years to start the thing, and then it would have
been a matter of public amusement--just sport for the papers.

But T. O. Nicholson could fix up his big steam yacht, load his
specially-made big motorboat aboard, and tuck in a “dissembled” biplane
without any more notice than a snip in the society column.

We had provisions and preventives and all manner of supplies. His
previous experience stood him in good stead there. It was a very
complete little outfit.

We were to leave the yacht at the nearest safe port and go up that
endless river in our motorboat, just the three of us and a pilot; then
drop the pilot when we got to that last stopping place of the previous
party, and hunt up that clear water stream ourselves.

The motorboat we were going to leave at anchor in that wide shallow
lake. It had a special covering of fitted armor, thin but strong, shut
up like a clamshell.

“Those natives can’t get into it, or hurt it, or move it,” Terry
explained proudly. “We’ll start our flier from the lake and leave the
boat as a base to come back to.”

“If we come back,” I suggested cheerfully.

“‘Fraid the ladies will eat you?” he scoffed.

“We’re not so sure about those ladies, you know,” drawled Jeff. “There
may be a contingent of gentlemen with poisoned arrows or something.”

“You don’t need to go if you don’t want to,” Terry remarked drily.

“Go? You’ll have to get an injunction to stop me!” Both Jeff and I were
sure about that.

But we did have differences of opinion, all the long way.

An ocean voyage is an excellent time for discussion. Now we had no
eavesdroppers, we could loll and loaf in our deck chairs and talk and
talk--there was nothing else to do. Our absolute lack of facts only made
the field of discussion wider.

“We’ll leave papers with our consul where the yacht stays,” Terry
planned. “If we don’t come back in--say a month--they can send a relief
party after us.”

“A punitive expedition,” I urged. “If the ladies do eat us we must make
reprisals.”

“They can locate that last stopping place easy enough, and I’ve made a
sort of chart of that lake and cliff and waterfall.”

“Yes, but how will they get up?” asked Jeff.

“Same way we do, of course. If three valuable American citizens are lost
up there, they will follow somehow--to say nothing of the glittering
attractions of that fair land--let’s call it ‘Feminisia,’” he broke off.

“You’re right, Terry. Once the story gets out, the river will crawl with
expeditions and the airships rise like a swarm of mosquitoes.” I laughed
as I thought of it. “We’ve made a great mistake not to let Mr. Yellow
Press in on this. Save us! What headlines!”

“Not much!” said Terry grimly. “This is our party. We’re going to find
that place alone.”

“What are you going to do with it when you do find it--if you do?” Jeff
asked mildly.

Jeff was a tender soul. I think he thought that country--if there was
one--was just blossoming with roses and babies and canaries and tidies,
and all that sort of thing.

And Terry, in his secret heart, had visions of a sort of sublimated
summer resort--just Girls and Girls and Girls--and that he was going to
be--well, Terry was popular among women even when there were other men
around, and it’s not to be wondered at that he had pleasant dreams of
what might happen. I could see it in his eyes as he lay there, looking
at the long blue rollers slipping by, and fingering that impressive
mustache of his.

But I thought--then--that I could form a far clearer idea of what was
before us than either of them.

“You’re all off, boys,” I insisted. “If there is such a place--and there
does seem some foundation for believing it--you’ll find it’s built on a
sort of matriarchal principle, that’s all. The men have a separate cult
of their own, less socially developed than the women, and make them an
annual visit--a sort of wedding call. This is a condition known to have
existed--here’s just a survival. They’ve got some peculiarly isolated
valley or tableland up there, and their primeval customs have survived.
That’s all there is to it.”

“How about the boys?” Jeff asked.

“Oh, the men take them away as soon as they are five or six, you see.”

“And how about this danger theory all our guides were so sure of?”

“Danger enough, Terry, and we’ll have to be mighty careful. Women of
that stage of culture are quite able to defend themselves and have no
welcome for unseasonable visitors.”

We talked and talked.

And with all my airs of sociological superiority I was no nearer than
any of them.

It was funny though, in the light of what we did find, those extremely
clear ideas of ours as to what a country of women would be like. It
was no use to tell ourselves and one another that all this was idle
speculation. We were idle and we did speculate, on the ocean voyage and
the river voyage, too.

“Admitting the improbability,” we’d begin solemnly, and then launch out
again.

“They would fight among themselves,” Terry insisted. “Women always do.
We mustn’t look to find any sort of order and organization.”

“You’re dead wrong,” Jeff told him. “It will be like a nunnery under an
abbess--a peaceful, harmonious sisterhood.”

I snorted derision at this idea.

“Nuns, indeed! Your peaceful sisterhoods were all celibate, Jeff, and
under vows of obedience. These are just women, and mothers, and where
there’s motherhood you don’t find sisterhood--not much.”

“No, sir--they’ll scrap,” agreed Terry. “Also we mustn’t look for
inventions and progress; it’ll be awfully primitive.”

“How about that cloth mill?” Jeff suggested.

“Oh, cloth! Women have always been spinsters. But there they
stop--you’ll see.”

We joked Terry about his modest impression that he would be warmly
received, but he held his ground.

“You’ll see,” he insisted. “I’ll get solid with them all--and play one
bunch against another. I’ll get myself elected king in no time--whew!
Solomon will have to take a back seat!”

“Where do we come in on that deal?” I demanded. “Aren’t we Viziers or
anything?”

“Couldn’t risk it,” he asserted solemnly. “You might start a
revolution--probably would. No, you’ll have to be beheaded, or
bowstrung--or whatever the popular method of execution is.”

“You’d have to do it yourself, remember,” grinned Jeff. “No husky black
slaves and mamelukes! And there’d be two of us and only one of you--eh,
Van?”

Jeff’s ideas and Terry’s were so far apart that sometimes it was all
I could do to keep the peace between them. Jeff idealized women in the
best Southern style. He was full of chivalry and sentiment, and all
that. And he was a good boy; he lived up to his ideals.

You might say Terry did, too, if you can call his views about women
anything so polite as ideals. I always liked Terry. He was a man’s man,
very much so, generous and brave and clever; but I don’t think any of
us in college days was quite pleased to have him with our sisters. We
weren’t very stringent, heavens no! But Terry was “the limit.” Later
on--why, of course a man’s life is his own, we held, and asked no
questions.

But barring a possible exception in favor of a not impossible wife, or
of his mother, or, of course, the fair relatives of his friends, Terry’s
idea seemed to be that pretty women were just so much game and homely
ones not worth considering.

It was really unpleasant sometimes to see the notions he had.

But I got out of patience with Jeff, too. He had such rose-colored halos
on his womenfolks. I held a middle ground, highly scientific, of course,
and used to argue learnedly about the physiological limitations of the
sex.

We were not in the least “advanced” on the woman question, any of us,
then.

So we joked and disputed and speculated, and after an interminable
journey, we got to our old camping place at last.

It was not hard to find the river, just poking along that side till we
came to it, and it was navigable as far as the lake.

When we reached that and slid out on its broad glistening bosom, with
that high gray promontory running out toward us, and the straight white
fall clearly visible, it began to be really exciting.

There was some talk, even then, of skirting the rock wall and seeking
a possible footway up, but the marshy jungle made that method look not
only difficult but dangerous.

Terry dismissed the plan sharply.

“Nonsense, fellows! We’ve decided that. It might take months--we haven’t
got the provisions. No, sir--we’ve got to take our chances. If we get
back safe--all right. If we don’t, why, we’re not the first explorers to
get lost in the shuffle. There are plenty to come after us.”

So we got the big biplane together and loaded it with our scientifically
compressed baggage: the camera, of course; the glasses; a supply of
concentrated food. Our pockets were magazines of small necessities, and
we had our guns, of course--there was no knowing what might happen.

Up and up and up we sailed, way up at first, to get “the lay of the
land” and make note of it.

Out of that dark green sea of crowding forest this high-standing spur
rose steeply. It ran back on either side, apparently, to the far-off
white-crowned peaks in the distance, themselves probably inaccessible.

“Let’s make the first trip geographical,” I suggested. “Spy out the
land, and drop back here for more gasoline. With your tremendous speed
we can reach that range and back all right. Then we can leave a sort of
map on board--for that relief expedition.”

“There’s sense in that,” Terry agreed. “I’ll put off being king of
Ladyland for one more day.”

So we made a long skirting voyage, turned the point of the cape which
was close by, ran up one side of the triangle at our best speed, crossed
over the base where it left the higher mountains, and so back to our
lake by moonlight.

“That’s not a bad little kingdom,” we agreed when it was roughly drawn
and measured. We could tell the size fairly by our speed. And from what
we could see of the sides--and that icy ridge at the back end--“It’s a
pretty enterprising savage who would manage to get into it,” Jeff said.

Of course we had looked at the land itself--eagerly, but we were too
high and going too fast to see much. It appeared to be well forested
about the edges, but in the interior there were wide plains, and
everywhere parklike meadows and open places.

There were cities, too; that I insisted. It looked--well, it looked like
any other country--a civilized one, I mean.

We had to sleep after that long sweep through the air, but we turned out
early enough next day, and again we rose softly up the height till
we could top the crowning trees and see the broad fair land at our
pleasure.

“Semitropical. Looks like a first-rate climate. It’s wonderful what a
little height will do for temperature.” Terry was studying the forest
growth.

“Little height! Is that what you call little?” I asked. Our instruments
measured it clearly. We had not realized the long gentle rise from the
coast perhaps.

“Mighty lucky piece of land, I call it,” Terry pursued. “Now for the
folks--I’ve had enough scenery.”

So we sailed low, crossing back and forth, quartering the country as we
went, and studying it. We saw--I can’t remember now how much of this we
noted then and how much was supplemented by our later knowledge, but we
could not help seeing this much, even on that excited day--a land in a
state of perfect cultivation, where even the forests looked as if they
were cared for; a land that looked like an enormous park, only it was
even more evidently an enormous garden.

“I don’t see any cattle,” I suggested, but Terry was silent. We were
approaching a village.

I confess that we paid small attention to the clean, well-built roads,
to the attractive architecture, to the ordered beauty of the little
town. We had our glasses out; even Terry, setting his machine for a
spiral glide, clapped the binoculars to his eyes.

They heard our whirring screw. They ran out of the houses--they gathered
in from the fields, swift-running light figures, crowds of them. We
stared and stared until it was almost too late to catch the levers,
sweep off and rise again; and then we held our peace for a long run
upward.

“Gosh!” said Terry, after a while.

“Only women there--and children,” Jeff urged excitedly.

“But they look--why, this is a _civilized_ country!” I protested. “There
must be men.”

“Of course there are men,” said Terry. “Come on, let’s find ’em.”

He refused to listen to Jeff’s suggestion that we examine the country
further before we risked leaving our machine.

“There’s a fine landing place right there where we came over,” he
insisted, and it was an excellent one--a wide, flat-topped rock,
overlooking the lake, and quite out of sight from the interior.

“They won’t find this in a hurry,” he asserted, as we scrambled with the
utmost difficulty down to safer footing. “Come on, boys--there were some
good lookers in that bunch.”

Of course it was unwise of us.

It was quite easy to see afterward that our best plan was to have
studied the country more fully before we left our swooping airship and
trusted ourselves to mere foot service. But we were three young men. We
had been talking about this country for over a year, hardly believing
that there was such a place, and now--we were in it.

It looked safe and civilized enough, and among those upturned, crowding
faces, though some were terrified enough, there was great beauty--on
that we all agreed.

“Come on!” cried Terry, pushing forward. “Oh, come on! Here goes for
Herland!”




CHAPTER 2.
Rash Advances


Not more than ten or fifteen miles we judged it from our landing rock to
that last village. For all our eagerness we thought it wise to keep to
the woods and go carefully.

Even Terry’s ardor was held in check by his firm conviction that there
were men to be met, and we saw to it that each of us had a good stock of
cartridges.

“They may be scarce, and they may be hidden away somewhere--some kind of
a matriarchate, as Jeff tells us; for that matter, they may live up
in the mountains yonder and keep the women in this part of the
country--sort of a national harem! But there are men somewhere--didn’t
you see the babies?”

We had all seen babies, children big and little, everywhere that we had
come near enough to distinguish the people. And though by dress we could
not be sure of all the grown persons, still there had not been one man
that we were certain of.

“I always liked that Arab saying, ‘First tie your camel and then trust
in the Lord,’” Jeff murmured; so we all had our weapons in hand, and
stole cautiously through the forest. Terry studied it as we progressed.

“Talk of civilization,” he cried softly in restrained enthusiasm. “I
never saw a forest so petted, even in Germany. Look, there’s not a dead
bough--the vines are trained--actually! And see here”--he stopped and
looked about him, calling Jeff’s attention to the kinds of trees.

They left me for a landmark and made a limited excursion on either side.

“Food-bearing, practically all of them,” they announced returning. “The
rest, splendid hardwood. Call this a forest? It’s a truck farm!”

“Good thing to have a botanist on hand,” I agreed. “Sure there are no
medicinal ones? Or any for pure ornament?”

As a matter of fact they were quite right. These towering trees were
under as careful cultivation as so many cabbages. In other conditions
we should have found those woods full of fair foresters and fruit
gatherers; but an airship is a conspicuous object, and by no means
quiet--and women are cautious.

All we found moving in those woods, as we started through them, were
birds, some gorgeous, some musical, all so tame that it seemed almost
to contradict our theory of cultivation--at least until we came upon
occasional little glades, where carved stone seats and tables stood in
the shade beside clear fountains, with shallow bird baths always added.

“They don’t kill birds, and apparently they do kill cats,” Terry
declared. “_Must_ be men here. Hark!”

We had heard something: something not in the least like a birdsong, and
very much like a suppressed whisper of laughter--a little happy sound,
instantly smothered. We stood like so many pointers, and then used our
glasses, swiftly, carefully.

“It couldn’t have been far off,” said Terry excitedly. “How about this
big tree?”

There was a very large and beautiful tree in the glade we had just
entered, with thick wide-spreading branches that sloped out in lapping
fans like a beech or pine. It was trimmed underneath some twenty feet
up, and stood there like a huge umbrella, with circling seats beneath.

“Look,” he pursued. “There are short stumps of branches left to climb
on. There’s someone up that tree, I believe.”

We stole near, cautiously.

“Look out for a poisoned arrow in your eye,” I suggested, but Terry
pressed forward, sprang up on the seat-back, and grasped the trunk. “In
my heart, more likely,” he answered. “Gee! Look, boys!”

We rushed close in and looked up. There among the boughs overhead was
something--more than one something--that clung motionless, close to the
great trunk at first, and then, as one and all we started up the tree,
separated into three swift-moving figures and fled upward. As we climbed
we could catch glimpses of them scattering above us. By the time we had
reached about as far as three men together dared push, they had left the
main trunk and moved outward, each one balanced on a long branch that
dipped and swayed beneath the weight.

We paused uncertain. If we pursued further, the boughs would break under
the double burden. We might shake them off, perhaps, but none of us was
so inclined. In the soft dappled light of these high regions, breathless
with our rapid climb, we rested awhile, eagerly studying our objects
of pursuit; while they in turn, with no more terror than a set of
frolicsome children in a game of tag, sat as lightly as so many big
bright birds on their precarious perches and frankly, curiously, stared
at us.

“Girls!” whispered Jeff, under his breath, as if they might fly if he
spoke aloud.

“Peaches!” added Terry, scarcely louder.
“Peacherinos--apricot-nectarines! Whew!”

They were girls, of course, no boys could ever have shown that sparkling
beauty, and yet none of us was certain at first.

We saw short hair, hatless, loose, and shining; a suit of some light
firm stuff, the closest of tunics and kneebreeches, met by trim gaiters.
As bright and smooth as parrots and as unaware of danger, they swung
there before us, wholly at ease, staring as we stared, till first one,
and then all of them burst into peals of delighted laughter.

Then there was a torrent of soft talk tossed back and forth; no savage
sing-song, but clear musical fluent speech.

We met their laughter cordially, and doffed our hats to them, at which
they laughed again, delightedly.

Then Terry, wholly in his element, made a polite speech, with
explanatory gestures, and proceeded to introduce us, with pointing
finger. “Mr. Jeff Margrave,” he said clearly; Jeff bowed as gracefully
as a man could in the fork of a great limb. “Mr. Vandyck Jennings”--I
also tried to make an effective salute and nearly lost my balance.

Then Terry laid his hand upon his chest--a fine chest he had, too,
and introduced himself; he was braced carefully for the occasion and
achieved an excellent obeisance.

Again they laughed delightedly, and the one nearest me followed his
tactics.

“Celis,” she said distinctly, pointing to the one in blue; “Alima”--the
one in rose; then, with a vivid imitation of Terry’s impressive manner,
she laid a firm delicate hand on her gold-green jerkin--“Ellador.” This
was pleasant, but we got no nearer.

“We can’t sit here and learn the language,” Terry protested. He beckoned
to them to come nearer, most winningly--but they gaily shook their
heads. He suggested, by signs, that we all go down together; but again
they shook their heads, still merrily. Then Ellador clearly indicated
that we should go down, pointing to each and all of us, with
unmistakable firmness; and further seeming to imply by the sweep of a
lithe arm that we not only go downward, but go away altogether--at which
we shook our heads in turn.

“Have to use bait,” grinned Terry. “I don’t know about you fellows,
but I came prepared.” He produced from an inner pocket a little box of
purple velvet, that opened with a snap--and out of it he drew a long
sparkling thing, a necklace of big varicolored stones that would have
been worth a million if real ones. He held it up, swung it, glittering
in the sun, offered it first to one, then to another, holding it out as
far as he could reach toward the girl nearest him. He stood braced
in the fork, held firmly by one hand--the other, swinging his bright
temptation, reached far out along the bough, but not quite to his full
stretch.

She was visibly moved, I noted, hesitated, spoke to her companions.
They chattered softly together, one evidently warning her, the other
encouraging. Then, softly and slowly, she drew nearer. This was Alima,
a tall long-limbed lass, well-knit and evidently both strong and agile.
Her eyes were splendid, wide, fearless, as free from suspicion as a
child’s who has never been rebuked. Her interest was more that of
an intent boy playing a fascinating game than of a girl lured by an
ornament.

The others moved a bit farther out, holding firmly, watching. Terry’s
smile was irreproachable, but I did not like the look in his eyes--it
was like a creature about to spring. I could already see it happen--the
dropped necklace, the sudden clutching hand, the girl’s sharp cry as he
seized her and drew her in. But it didn’t happen. She made a timid reach
with her right hand for the gay swinging thing--he held it a little
nearer--then, swift as light, she seized it from him with her left, and
dropped on the instant to the bough below.

He made his snatch, quite vainly, almost losing his position as his
hand clutched only air; and then, with inconceivable rapidity, the three
bright creatures were gone. They dropped from the ends of the big boughs
to those below, fairly pouring themselves off the tree, while we climbed
downward as swiftly as we could. We heard their vanishing gay laughter,
we saw them fleeting away in the wide open reaches of the forest, and
gave chase, but we might as well have chased wild antelopes; so we
stopped at length somewhat breathless.

“No use,” gasped Terry. “They got away with it. My word! The men of this
country must be good sprinters!”

“Inhabitants evidently arboreal,” I grimly suggested. “Civilized and
still arboreal--peculiar people.”

“You shouldn’t have tried that way,” Jeff protested. “They were
perfectly friendly; now we’ve scared them.”

But it was no use grumbling, and Terry refused to admit any mistake.
“Nonsense,” he said. “They expected it. Women like to be run after. Come
on, let’s get to that town; maybe we’ll find them there. Let’s see, it
was in this direction and not far from the woods, as I remember.”

When we reached the edge of the open country we reconnoitered with our
field glasses. There it was, about four miles off, the same town, we
concluded, unless, as Jeff ventured, they all had pink houses. The broad
green fields and closely cultivated gardens sloped away at our feet, a
long easy slant, with good roads winding pleasantly here and there, and
narrower paths besides.

“Look at that!” cried Jeff suddenly. “There they go!”

Sure enough, close to the town, across a wide meadow, three bright-hued
figures were running swiftly.

“How could they have got that far in this time? It can’t be the same
ones,” I urged. But through the glasses we could identify our pretty
tree-climbers quite plainly, at least by costume.

Terry watched them, we all did for that matter, till they disappeared
among the houses. Then he put down his glass and turned to us, drawing
a long breath. “Mother of Mike, boys--what Gorgeous Girls! To climb like
that! to run like that! and afraid of nothing. This country suits me all
right. Let’s get ahead.”

“Nothing venture, nothing have,” I suggested, but Terry preferred “Faint
heart ne’er won fair lady.”

We set forth in the open, walking briskly. “If there are any men, we’d
better keep an eye out,” I suggested, but Jeff seemed lost in heavenly
dreams, and Terry in highly practical plans.

“What a perfect road! What a heavenly country! See the flowers, will
you?”

This was Jeff, always an enthusiast; but we could agree with him fully.

The road was some sort of hard manufactured stuff, sloped slightly to
shed rain, with every curve and grade and gutter as perfect as if it
were Europe’s best. “No men, eh?” sneered Terry. On either side a double
row of trees shaded the footpaths; between the trees bushes or vines,
all fruit-bearing, now and then seats and little wayside fountains;
everywhere flowers.

“We’d better import some of these ladies and set ’em to parking the
United States,” I suggested. “Mighty nice place they’ve got here.” We
rested a few moments by one of the fountains, tested the fruit that
looked ripe, and went on, impressed, for all our gay bravado by the
sense of quiet potency which lay about us.

Here was evidently a people highly skilled, efficient, caring for their
country as a florist cares for his costliest orchids. Under the soft
brilliant blue of that clear sky, in the pleasant shade of those endless
rows of trees, we walked unharmed, the placid silence broken only by the
birds.

Presently there lay before us at the foot of a long hill the town or
village we were aiming for. We stopped and studied it.

Jeff drew a long breath. “I wouldn’t have believed a collection of
houses could look so lovely,” he said.

“They’ve got architects and landscape gardeners in plenty, that’s sure,”
 agreed Terry.

I was astonished myself. You see, I come from California, and there’s no
country lovelier, but when it comes to towns--! I have often groaned
at home to see the offensive mess man made in the face of nature, even
though I’m no art sharp, like Jeff. But this place! It was built mostly
of a sort of dull rose-colored stone, with here and there some clear
white houses; and it lay abroad among the green groves and gardens like
a broken rosary of pink coral.

“Those big white ones are public buildings evidently,” Terry declared.
“This is no savage country, my friend. But no men? Boys, it behooves us
to go forward most politely.”

The place had an odd look, more impressive as we approached. “It’s like
an exposition.” “It’s too pretty to be true.” “Plenty of palaces, but
where are the homes?” “Oh there are little ones enough--but--.” It
certainly was different from any towns we had ever seen.

“There’s no dirt,” said Jeff suddenly. “There’s no smoke,” he added
after a little.

“There’s no noise,” I offered; but Terry snubbed me--“That’s because
they are laying low for us; we’d better be careful how we go in there.”

Nothing could induce him to stay out, however, so we walked on.

Everything was beauty, order, perfect cleanness, and the pleasantest
sense of home over it all. As we neared the center of the town the
houses stood thicker, ran together as it were, grew into rambling
palaces grouped among parks and open squares, something as college
buildings stand in their quiet greens.

And then, turning a corner, we came into a broad paved space and
saw before us a band of women standing close together in even order,
evidently waiting for us.

We stopped a moment and looked back. The street behind was closed by
another band, marching steadily, shoulder to shoulder. We went
on--there seemed no other way to go--and presently found ourselves quite
surrounded by this close-massed multitude, women, all of them, but--

They were not young. They were not old. They were not, in the girl
sense, beautiful. They were not in the least ferocious. And yet, as I
looked from face to face, calm, grave, wise, wholly unafraid, evidently
assured and determined, I had the funniest feeling--a very early
feeling--a feeling that I traced back and back in memory until I caught
up with it at last. It was that sense of being hopelessly in the wrong
that I had so often felt in early youth when my short legs’ utmost
effort failed to overcome the fact that I was late to school.

Jeff felt it too; I could see he did. We felt like small boys, very
small boys, caught doing mischief in some gracious lady’s house. But
Terry showed no such consciousness. I saw his quick eyes darting here
and there, estimating numbers, measuring distances, judging chances of
escape. He examined the close ranks about us, reaching back far on every
side, and murmured softly to me, “Every one of ’em over forty as I’m a
sinner.”

Yet they were not old women. Each was in the full bloom of rosy health,
erect, serene, standing sure-footed and light as any pugilist. They had
no weapons, and we had, but we had no wish to shoot.

“I’d as soon shoot my aunts,” muttered Terry again. “What do they
want with us anyhow? They seem to mean business.” But in spite of that
businesslike aspect, he determined to try his favorite tactics. Terry
had come armed with a theory.

He stepped forward, with his brilliant ingratiating smile, and made low
obeisance to the women before him. Then he produced another tribute, a
broad soft scarf of filmy texture, rich in color and pattern, a lovely
thing, even to my eye, and offered it with a deep bow to the tall
unsmiling woman who seemed to head the ranks before him. She took it
with a gracious nod of acknowledgment, and passed it on to those behind
her.

He tried again, this time bringing out a circlet of rhinestones, a
glittering crown that should have pleased any woman on earth. He made a
brief address, including Jeff and me as partners in his enterprise, and
with another bow presented this. Again his gift was accepted and, as
before, passed out of sight.

“If they were only younger,” he muttered between his teeth. “What on
earth is a fellow to say to a regiment of old Colonels like this?”

In all our discussions and speculations we had always unconsciously
assumed that the women, whatever else they might be, would be young.
Most men do think that way, I fancy.

“Woman” in the abstract is young, and, we assume, charming. As they get
older they pass off the stage, somehow, into private ownership mostly,
or out of it altogether. But these good ladies were very much on the
stage, and yet any one of them might have been a grandmother.

We looked for nervousness--there was none.

For terror, perhaps--there was none.

For uneasiness, for curiosity, for excitement--and all we saw was what
might have been a vigilance committee of women doctors, as cool as
cucumbers, and evidently meaning to take us to task for being there.

Six of them stepped forward now, one on either side of each of us, and
indicated that we were to go with them. We thought it best to accede, at
first anyway, and marched along, one of these close at each elbow, and
the others in close masses before, behind, on both sides.

A large building opened before us, a very heavy thick-walled impressive
place, big, and old-looking; of gray stone, not like the rest of the
town.

“This won’t do!” said Terry to us, quickly. “We mustn’t let them get us
in this, boys. All together, now--”

We stopped in our tracks. We began to explain, to make signs pointing
away toward the big forest--indicating that we would go back to it--at
once.

It makes me laugh, knowing all I do now, to think of us three
boys--nothing else; three audacious impertinent boys--butting into an
unknown country without any sort of a guard or defense. We seemed to
think that if there were men we could fight them, and if there were only
women--why, they would be no obstacles at all.

Jeff, with his gentle romantic old-fashioned notions of women as
clinging vines. Terry, with his clear decided practical theories that
there were two kinds of women--those he wanted and those he didn’t;
Desirable and Undesirable was his demarcation. The latter as a large
class, but negligible--he had never thought about them at all.

And now here they were, in great numbers, evidently indifferent to
what he might think, evidently determined on some purpose of their own
regarding him, and apparently well able to enforce their purpose.

We all thought hard just then. It had not seemed wise to object to going
with them, even if we could have; our one chance was friendliness--a
civilized attitude on both sides.

But once inside that building, there was no knowing what these
determined ladies might do to us. Even a peaceful detention was not to
our minds, and when we named it imprisonment it looked even worse.

So we made a stand, trying to make clear that we preferred the open
country. One of them came forward with a sketch of our flier, asking by
signs if we were the aerial visitors they had seen.

This we admitted.

They pointed to it again, and to the outlying country, in different
directions--but we pretended we did not know where it was, and in
truth we were not quite sure and gave a rather wild indication of its
whereabouts.

Again they motioned us to advance, standing so packed about the door
that there remained but the one straight path open. All around us and
behind they were massed solidly--there was simply nothing to do but go
forward--or fight.

We held a consultation.

“I never fought with women in my life,” said Terry, greatly perturbed,
“but I’m not going in there. I’m not going to be--herded in--as if we
were in a cattle chute.”

“We can’t fight them, of course,” Jeff urged. “They’re all women,
in spite of their nondescript clothes; nice women, too; good strong
sensible faces. I guess we’ll have to go in.”

“We may never get out, if we do,” I told them. “Strong and sensible,
yes; but I’m not so sure about the good. Look at those faces!”

They had stood at ease, waiting while we conferred together, but never
relaxing their close attention.

Their attitude was not the rigid discipline of soldiers; there was no
sense of compulsion about them. Terry’s term of a “vigilance committee”
 was highly descriptive. They had just the aspect of sturdy burghers,
gathered hastily to meet some common need or peril, all moved by
precisely the same feelings, to the same end.

Never, anywhere before, had I seen women of precisely this quality.
Fishwives and market women might show similar strength, but it was
coarse and heavy. These were merely athletic--light and powerful.
College professors, teachers, writers--many women showed similar
intelligence but often wore a strained nervous look, while these were as
calm as cows, for all their evident intellect.

We observed pretty closely just then, for all of us felt that it was a
crucial moment.

The leader gave some word of command and beckoned us on, and the
surrounding mass moved a step nearer.

“We’ve got to decide quick,” said Terry.

“I vote to go in,” Jeff urged. But we were two to one against him and he
loyally stood by us. We made one more effort to be let go, urgent, but
not imploring. In vain.

“Now for a rush, boys!” Terry said. “And if we can’t break ’em, I’ll
shoot in the air.”

Then we found ourselves much in the position of the suffragette trying
to get to the Parliament buildings through a triple cordon of London
police.

The solidity of those women was something amazing. Terry soon found that
it was useless, tore himself loose for a moment, pulled his revolver,
and fired upward. As they caught at it, he fired again--we heard a
cry--.

Instantly each of us was seized by five women, each holding arm or leg
or head; we were lifted like children, straddling helpless children, and
borne onward, wriggling indeed, but most ineffectually.

We were borne inside, struggling manfully, but held secure most
womanfully, in spite of our best endeavors.

So carried and so held, we came into a high inner hall, gray and bare,
and were brought before a majestic gray-haired woman who seemed to hold
a judicial position.

There was some talk, not much, among them, and then suddenly there fell
upon each of us at once a firm hand holding a wetted cloth before mouth
and nose--an order of swimming sweetness--anesthesia.




CHAPTER 3.
A Peculiar Imprisonment


From a slumber as deep as death, as refreshing as that of a healthy
child, I slowly awakened.

It was like rising up, up, up through a deep warm ocean, nearer
and nearer to full light and stirring air. Or like the return to
consciousness after concussion of the brain. I was once thrown from a
horse while on a visit to a wild mountainous country quite new to me,
and I can clearly remember the mental experience of coming back to life,
through lifting veils of dream. When I first dimly heard the voices of
those about me, and saw the shining snowpeaks of that mighty range, I
assumed that this too would pass, and I should presently find myself in
my own home.

That was precisely the experience of this awakening: receding waves of
half-caught swirling vision, memories of home, the steamer, the boat,
the airship, the forest--at last all sinking away one after another,
till my eyes were wide open, my brain clear, and I realized what had
happened.

The most prominent sensation was of absolute physical comfort. I was
lying in a perfect bed: long, broad, smooth; firmly soft and level; with
the finest linen, some warm light quilt of blanket, and a counterpane
that was a joy to the eye. The sheet turned down some fifteen inches,
yet I could stretch my feet at the foot of the bed free but warmly
covered.

I felt as light and clean as a white feather. It took me some time to
conscientiously locate my arms and legs, to feel the vivid sense of life
radiate from the wakening center to the extremities.

A big room, high and wide, with many lofty windows whose closed blinds
let through soft green-lit air; a beautiful room, in proportion, in
color, in smooth simplicity; a scent of blossoming gardens outside.

I lay perfectly still, quite happy, quite conscious, and yet not
actively realizing what had happened till I heard Terry.

“Gosh!” was what he said.

I turned my head. There were three beds in this chamber, and plenty of
room for them.

Terry was sitting up, looking about him, alert as ever. His remark,
though not loud, roused Jeff also. We all sat up.

Terry swung his legs out of bed, stood up, stretched himself mightily.
He was in a long nightrobe, a sort of seamless garment, undoubtedly
comfortable--we all found ourselves so covered. Shoes were beside each
bed, also quite comfortable and goodlooking though by no means like our
own.

We looked for our clothes--they were not there, nor anything of all the
varied contents of our pockets.

A door stood somewhat ajar; it opened into a most attractive bathroom,
copiously provided with towels, soap, mirrors, and all such convenient
comforts, with indeed our toothbrushes and combs, our notebooks, and
thank goodness, our watches--but no clothes.

Then we made a search of the big room again and found a large airy
closet, holding plenty of clothing, but not ours.

“A council of war!” demanded Terry. “Come on back to bed--the bed’s all
right anyhow. Now then, my scientific friend, let us consider our case
dispassionately.”

He meant me, but Jeff seemed most impressed.

“They haven’t hurt us in the least!” he said. “They could have killed
us--or--or anything--and I never felt better in my life.”

“That argues that they are all women,” I suggested, “and highly
civilized. You know you hit one in the last scrimmage--I heard her sing
out--and we kicked awfully.”

Terry was grinning at us. “So you realize what these ladies have done to
us?” he pleasantly inquired. “They have taken away all our possessions,
all our clothes--every stitch. We have been stripped and washed and put
to bed like so many yearling babies--by these highly civilized women.”

Jeff actually blushed. He had a poetic imagination. Terry had
imagination enough, of a different kind. So had I, also different.
I always flattered myself I had the scientific imagination, which,
incidentally, I considered the highest sort. One has a right to a
certain amount of egotism if founded on fact--and kept to one’s self--I
think.

“No use kicking, boys,” I said. “They’ve got us, and apparently they’re
perfectly harmless. It remains for us to cook up some plan of escape
like any other bottled heroes. Meanwhile we’ve got to put on these
clothes--Hobson’s choice.”

The garments were simple in the extreme, and absolutely comfortable,
physically, though of course we all felt like supes in the theater.
There was a one-piece cotton undergarment, thin and soft, that reached
over the knees and shoulders, something like the one-piece pajamas some
fellows wear, and a kind of half-hose, that came up to just under the
knee and stayed there--had elastic tops of their own, and covered the
edges of the first.

Then there was a thicker variety of union suit, a lot of them in the
closet, of varying weights and somewhat sturdier material--evidently
they would do at a pinch with nothing further. Then there were tunics,
knee-length, and some long robes. Needless to say, we took tunics.

We bathed and dressed quite cheerfully.

“Not half bad,” said Terry, surveying himself in a long mirror. His
hair was somewhat longer than when we left the last barber, and the
hats provided were much like those seen on the prince in the fairy tale,
lacking the plume.

The costume was similar to that which we had seen on all the women,
though some of them, those working in the fields, glimpsed by our
glasses when we first flew over, wore only the first two.

I settled my shoulders and stretched my arms, remarking: “They have
worked out a mighty sensible dress, I’ll say that for them.” With which
we all agreed.

“Now then,” Terry proclaimed, “we’ve had a fine long sleep--we’ve had a
good bath--we’re clothed and in our right minds, though feeling like a
lot of neuters. Do you think these highly civilized ladies are going to
give us any breakfast?”

“Of course they will,” Jeff asserted confidently. “If they had meant to
kill us, they would have done it before. I believe we are going to be
treated as guests.”

“Hailed as deliverers, I think,” said Terry.

“Studied as curiosities,” I told them. “But anyhow, we want food. So now
for a sortie!”

A sortie was not so easy.

The bathroom only opened into our chamber, and that had but one outlet,
a big heavy door, which was fastened.

We listened.

“There’s someone outside,” Jeff suggested. “Let’s knock.”

So we knocked, whereupon the door opened.

Outside was another large room, furnished with a great table at one
end, long benches or couches against the wall, some smaller tables
and chairs. All these were solid, strong, simple in structure, and
comfortable in use--also, incidentally, beautiful.

This room was occupied by a number of women, eighteen to be exact, some
of whom we distinctly recalled.

Terry heaved a disappointed sigh. “The Colonels!” I heard him whisper to
Jeff.

Jeff, however, advanced and bowed in his best manner; so did we all, and
we were saluted civilly by the tall-standing women.

We had no need to make pathetic pantomime of hunger; the smaller tables
were already laid with food, and we were gravely invited to be seated.
The tables were set for two; each of us found ourselves placed vis-a-vis
with one of our hosts, and each table had five other stalwarts nearby,
unobtrusively watching. We had plenty of time to get tired of those
women!

The breakfast was not profuse, but sufficient in amount and excellent in
quality. We were all too good travelers to object to novelty, and this
repast with its new but delicious fruit, its dish of large rich-flavored
nuts, and its highly satisfactory little cakes was most agreeable. There
was water to drink, and a hot beverage of a most pleasing quality, some
preparation like cocoa.

And then and there, willy-nilly, before we had satisfied our appetites,
our education began.

By each of our plates lay a little book, a real printed book, though
different from ours both in paper and binding, as well, of course, as in
type. We examined them curiously.

“Shades of Sauveur!” muttered Terry. “We’re to learn the language!”

We were indeed to learn the language, and not only that, but to teach
our own. There were blank books with parallel columns, neatly ruled,
evidently prepared for the occasion, and in these, as fast as we learned
and wrote down the name of anything, we were urged to write our own name
for it by its side.

The book we had to study was evidently a schoolbook, one in which
children learned to read, and we judged from this, and from their
frequent consultation as to methods, that they had had no previous
experience in the art of teaching foreigners their language, or of
learning any other.

On the other hand, what they lacked in experience, they made up for
in genius. Such subtle understanding, such instant recognition of our
difficulties, and readiness to meet them, were a constant surprise to
us.

Of course, we were willing to meet them halfway. It was wholly to
our advantage to be able to understand and speak with them, and as
to refusing to teach them--why should we? Later on we did try open
rebellion, but only once.

That first meal was pleasant enough, each of us quietly studying
his companion, Jeff with sincere admiration, Terry with that highly
technical look of his, as of a past master--like a lion tamer, a serpent
charmer, or some such professional. I myself was intensely interested.

It was evident that those sets of five were there to check any outbreak
on our part. We had no weapons, and if we did try to do any damage, with
a chair, say, why five to one was too many for us, even if they were
women; that we had found out to our sorrow. It was not pleasant, having
them always around, but we soon got used to it.

“It’s better than being physically restrained ourselves,” Jeff
philosophically suggested when we were alone. “They’ve given us a
room--with no great possibility of escape--and personal liberty--heavily
chaperoned. It’s better than we’d have been likely to get in a
man-country.”

“Man-Country! Do you really believe there are no men here, you innocent?
Don’t you know there must be?” demanded Terry.

“Ye--es,” Jeff agreed. “Of course--and yet--”

“And yet--what! Come, you obdurate sentimentalist--what are you thinking
about?”

“They may have some peculiar division of labor we’ve never heard of,” I
suggested. “The men may live in separate towns, or they may have subdued
them--somehow--and keep them shut up. But there must be some.”

“That last suggestion of yours is a nice one, Van,” Terry protested.
“Same as they’ve got us subdued and shut up! you make me shiver.”

“Well, figure it out for yourself, anyway you please. We saw plenty of
kids, the first day, and we’ve seen those girls--”

“Real girls!” Terry agreed, in immense relief. “Glad you mentioned
’em. I declare, if I thought there was nothing in the country but those
grenadiers I’d jump out the window.”

“Speaking of windows,” I suggested, “let’s examine ours.”

We looked out of all the windows. The blinds opened easily enough, and
there were no bars, but the prospect was not reassuring.

This was not the pink-walled town we had so rashly entered the day
before. Our chamber was high up, in a projecting wing of a sort of
castle, built out on a steep spur of rock. Immediately below us were
gardens, fruitful and fragrant, but their high walls followed the edge
of the cliff which dropped sheer down, we could not see how far. The
distant sound of water suggested a river at the foot.

We could look out east, west, and south. To the southeastward stretched
the open country, lying bright and fair in the morning light, but on
either side, and evidently behind, rose great mountains.

“This thing is a regular fortress--and no women built it, I can tell
you that,” said Terry. We nodded agreeingly. “It’s right up among the
hills--they must have brought us a long way.”

“We saw some kind of swift-moving vehicles the first day,” Jeff reminded
us. “If they’ve got motors, they _are_ civilized.”

“Civilized or not, we’ve got our work cut out for us to get away from
here. I don’t propose to make a rope of bedclothes and try those walls
till I’m sure there is no better way.”

We all concurred on this point, and returned to our discussion as to the
women.

Jeff continued thoughtful. “All the same, there’s something funny about
it,” he urged. “It isn’t just that we don’t see any men--but we don’t
see any signs of them. The--the--reaction of these women is different
from any that I’ve ever met.”

“There is something in what you say, Jeff,” I agreed. “There is a
different--atmosphere.”

“They don’t seem to notice our being men,” he went on. “They treat
us--well--just as they do one another. It’s as if our being men was a
minor incident.”

I nodded. I’d noticed it myself. But Terry broke in rudely.

“Fiddlesticks!” he said. “It’s because of their advanced age. They’re
all grandmas, I tell you--or ought to be. Great aunts, anyhow. Those
girls were girls all right, weren’t they?”

“Yes--” Jeff agreed, still slowly. “But they weren’t afraid--they flew
up that tree and hid, like schoolboys caught out of bounds--not like shy
girls.”

“And they ran like marathon winners--you’ll admit that, Terry,” he
added.

Terry was moody as the days passed. He seemed to mind our confinement
more than Jeff or I did; and he harped on Alima, and how near he’d come
to catching her. “If I had--” he would say, rather savagely, “we’d have
had a hostage and could have made terms.”

But Jeff was getting on excellent terms with his tutor, and even his
guards, and so was I. It interested me profoundly to note and study
the subtle difference between these women and other women, and try to
account for them. In the matter of personal appearance, there was a
great difference. They all wore short hair, some few inches at most;
some curly, some not; all light and clean and fresh-looking.

“If their hair was only long,” Jeff would complain, “they would look so
much more feminine.”

I rather liked it myself, after I got used to it. Why we should so
admire “a woman’s crown of hair” and not admire a Chinaman’s queue is
hard to explain, except that we are so convinced that the long hair
“belongs” to a woman. Whereas the “mane” in horses is on both, and in
lions, buffalos, and such creatures only on the male. But I did miss
it--at first.

Our time was quite pleasantly filled. We were free of the garden below
our windows, quite long in its irregular rambling shape, bordering the
cliff. The walls were perfectly smooth and high, ending in the masonry
of the building; and as I studied the great stones I became convinced
that the whole structure was extremely old. It was built like the
pre-Incan architecture in Peru, of enormous monoliths, fitted as closely
as mosaics.

“These folks have a history, that’s sure,” I told the others. “And SOME
time they were fighters--else why a fortress?”

I said we were free of the garden, but not wholly alone in it. There
was always a string of those uncomfortably strong women sitting about,
always one of them watching us even if the others were reading, playing
games, or busy at some kind of handiwork.

“When I see them knit,” Terry said, “I can almost call them feminine.”

“That doesn’t prove anything,” Jeff promptly replied. “Scotch shepherds
knit--always knitting.”

“When we get out--” Terry stretched himself and looked at the far
peaks, “when we get out of this and get to where the real women are--the
mothers, and the girls--”

“Well, what’ll we do then?” I asked, rather gloomily. “How do you know
we’ll ever get out?”

This was an unpleasant idea, which we unanimously considered, returning
with earnestness to our studies.

“If we are good boys and learn our lessons well,” I suggested. “If we
are quiet and respectful and polite and they are not afraid of us--then
perhaps they will let us out. And anyway--when we do escape, it is of
immense importance that we know the language.”

Personally, I was tremendously interested in that language, and seeing
they had books, was eager to get at them, to dig into their history, if
they had one.

It was not hard to speak, smooth and pleasant to the ear, and so easy
to read and write that I marveled at it. They had an absolutely phonetic
system, the whole thing was as scientific as Esparanto yet bore all the
marks of an old and rich civilization.

We were free to study as much as we wished, and were not left merely to
wander in the garden for recreation but introduced to a great gymnasium,
partly on the roof and partly in the story below. Here we learned real
respect for our tall guards. No change of costume was needed for this
work, save to lay off outer clothing. The first one was as perfect a
garment for exercise as need be devised, absolutely free to move in,
and, I had to admit, much better-looking than our usual one.

“Forty--over forty--some of ’em fifty, I bet--and look at ’em!” grumbled
Terry in reluctant admiration.

There were no spectacular acrobatics, such as only the young can
perform, but for all-around development they had a most excellent
system. A good deal of music went with it, with posture dancing and,
sometimes, gravely beautiful processional performances.

Jeff was much impressed by it. We did not know then how small a part of
their physical culture methods this really was, but found it agreeable
to watch, and to take part in.

Oh yes, we took part all right! It wasn’t absolutely compulsory, but we
thought it better to please.

Terry was the strongest of us, though I was wiry and had good staying
power, and Jeff was a great sprinter and hurdler, but I can tell you
those old ladies gave us cards and spades. They ran like deer, by which
I mean that they ran not as if it was a performance, but as if it was
their natural gait. We remembered those fleeting girls of our first
bright adventure, and concluded that it was.

They leaped like deer, too, with a quick folding motion of the legs,
drawn up and turned to one side with a sidelong twist of the body. I
remembered the sprawling spread-eagle way in which some of the fellows
used to come over the line--and tried to learn the trick. We did not
easily catch up with these experts, however.

“Never thought I’d live to be bossed by a lot of elderly lady acrobats,”
 Terry protested.

They had games, too, a good many of them, but we found them rather
uninteresting at first. It was like two people playing solitaire to
see who would get it first; more like a race or a--a competitive
examination, than a real game with some fight in it.

I philosophized a bit over this and told Terry it argued against their
having any men about. “There isn’t a man-size game in the lot,” I said.

“But they are interesting--I like them,” Jeff objected, “and I’m sure
they are educational.”

“I’m sick and tired of being educated,” Terry protested. “Fancy going to
a dame school--at our age. I want to Get Out!”

But we could not get out, and we were being educated swiftly. Our
special tutors rose rapidly in our esteem. They seemed of rather finer
quality than the guards, though all were on terms of easy friendliness.
Mine was named Somel, Jeff’s Zava, and Terry’s Moadine. We tried to
generalize from the names, those of the guards, and of our three girls,
but got nowhere.

“They sound well enough, and they’re mostly short, but there’s no
similarity of termination--and no two alike. However, our acquaintance
is limited as yet.”

There were many things we meant to ask--as soon as we could talk well
enough. Better teaching I never saw. From morning to night there was
Somel, always on call except between two and four; always pleasant with
a steady friendly kindness that I grew to enjoy very much. Jeff said
Miss Zava--he would put on a title, though they apparently had none--was
a darling, that she reminded him of his Aunt Esther at home; but Terry
refused to be won, and rather jeered at his own companion, when we were
alone.

“I’m sick of it!” he protested. “Sick of the whole thing. Here we are
cooped up as helpless as a bunch of three-year-old orphans, and being
taught what they think is necessary--whether we like it or not. Confound
their old-maid impudence!”

Nevertheless we were taught. They brought in a raised map of their
country, beautifully made, and increased our knowledge of geographical
terms; but when we inquired for information as to the country outside,
they smilingly shook their heads.

They brought pictures, not only the