The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Song of the Lark
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Song of the Lark

Author: Willa Cather


        
Release date: June 27, 2008 [eBook #44]
                Most recently updated: April 29, 2022

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/44

Credits: Judith Boss, Marvin Peterson and David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SONG OF THE LARK ***

[Illustration]




THE SONG OF THE LARK

By Willa Cather

(1915 edition)


CONTENTS

 PART I. FRIENDS OF CHILDHOOD
 I
 II
 III
 IV
 V
 VI
 VII
 VIII
 IX
 X
 XI
 XII
 XIII
 XIV
 XV
 XVI
 XVII
 XVIII
 XIX
 XX

 PART II. THE SONG OF THE LARK
 I
 II
 III
 IV
 V
 VI
 VII
 VIII
 IX
 X
 XI

 PART III. STUPID FACES
 I
 II
 III
 IV
 V
 VI

 PART IV. THE ANCIENT PEOPLE
 I
 II
 III
 IV
 V
 VI
 VII
 VIII

 PART V. DR. ARCHIE’S VENTURE
 I
 II
 III
 IV
 V

 PART VI. KRONBORG
 I
 II
 III
 IV
 V
 VI
 VII
 VIII
 IX
 X
 XI

 EPILOGUE




PART I.
FRIENDS OF CHILDHOOD




I


Dr. Howard Archie had just come up from a game of pool with the Jewish
clothier and two traveling men who happened to be staying overnight in
Moonstone. His offices were in the Duke Block, over the drug store.
Larry, the doctor’s man, had lit the overhead light in the waiting-room
and the double student’s lamp on the desk in the study. The isinglass
sides of the hard-coal burner were aglow, and the air in the study was
so hot that as he came in the doctor opened the door into his little
operating-room, where there was no stove. The waiting room was carpeted
and stiffly furnished, something like a country parlor. The study had
worn, unpainted floors, but there was a look of winter comfort about
it. The doctor’s flat-top desk was large and well made; the papers were
in orderly piles, under glass weights. Behind the stove a wide
bookcase, with double glass doors, reached from the floor to the
ceiling. It was filled with medical books of every thickness and color.
On the top shelf stood a long row of thirty or forty volumes, bound all
alike in dark mottled board covers, with imitation leather backs.

As the doctor in New England villages is proverbially old, so the
doctor in small Colorado towns twenty-five years ago was generally
young. Dr. Archie was barely thirty. He was tall, with massive
shoulders which he held stiffly, and a large, well-shaped head. He was
a distinguished-looking man, for that part of the world, at least.

There was something individual in the way in which his reddish-brown
hair, parted cleanly at the side, bushed over his high forehead. His
nose was straight and thick, and his eyes were intelligent. He wore a
curly, reddish mustache and an imperial, cut trimly, which made him
look a little like the pictures of Napoleon III. His hands were large
and well kept, but ruggedly formed, and the backs were shaded with
crinkly reddish hair. He wore a blue suit of woolly, wide-waled serge;
the traveling men had known at a glance that it was made by a Denver
tailor. The doctor was always well dressed.

Dr. Archie turned up the student’s lamp and sat down in the swivel
chair before his desk. He sat uneasily, beating a tattoo on his knees
with his fingers, and looked about him as if he were bored. He glanced
at his watch, then absently took from his pocket a bunch of small keys,
selected one and looked at it. A contemptuous smile, barely
perceptible, played on his lips, but his eyes remained meditative.
Behind the door that led into the hall, under his buffalo-skin
driving-coat, was a locked cupboard. This the doctor opened
mechanically, kicking aside a pile of muddy overshoes. Inside, on the
shelves, were whiskey glasses and decanters, lemons, sugar, and
bitters. Hearing a step in the empty, echoing hall without, the doctor
closed the cupboard again, snapping the Yale lock. The door of the
waiting-room opened, a man entered and came on into the
consulting-room.

“Good-evening, Mr. Kronborg,” said the doctor carelessly. “Sit down.”

His visitor was a tall, loosely built man, with a thin brown beard,
streaked with gray. He wore a frock coat, a broad-brimmed black hat, a
white lawn necktie, and steel rimmed spectacles. Altogether there was a
pretentious and important air about him, as he lifted the skirts of his
coat and sat down.

“Good-evening, doctor. Can you step around to the house with me? I
think Mrs. Kronborg will need you this evening.” This was said with
profound gravity and, curiously enough, with a slight embarrassment.

“Any hurry?” the doctor asked over his shoulder as he went into his
operating-room.

Mr. Kronborg coughed behind his hand, and contracted his brows. His
face threatened at every moment to break into a smile of foolish
excitement. He controlled it only by calling upon his habitual pulpit
manner. “Well, I think it would be as well to go immediately. Mrs.
Kronborg will be more comfortable if you are there. She has been
suffering for some time.”

The doctor came back and threw a black bag upon his desk. He wrote some
instructions for his man on a prescription pad and then drew on his
overcoat. “All ready,” he announced, putting out his lamp. Mr. Kronborg
rose and they tramped through the empty hall and down the stairway to
the street. The drug store below was dark, and the saloon next door was
just closing. Every other light on Main Street was out.

On either side of the road and at the outer edge of the board sidewalk,
the snow had been shoveled into breastworks. The town looked small and
black, flattened down in the snow, muffled and all but extinguished.
Overhead the stars shone gloriously. It was impossible not to notice
them. The air was so clear that the white sand hills to the east of
Moonstone gleamed softly. Following the Reverend Mr. Kronborg along the
narrow walk, past the little dark, sleeping houses, the doctor looked
up at the flashing night and whistled softly. It did seem that people
were stupider than they need be; as if on a night like this there ought
to be something better to do than to sleep nine hours, or to assist
Mrs. Kronborg in functions which she could have performed so admirably
unaided. He wished he had gone down to Denver to hear Fay Templeton
sing “See-Saw.” Then he remembered that he had a personal interest in
this family, after all. They turned into another street and saw before
them lighted windows; a low story-and-a-half house, with a wing built
on at the right and a kitchen addition at the back, everything a little
on the slant—roofs, windows, and doors. As they approached the gate,
Peter Kronborg’s pace grew brisker. His nervous, ministerial cough
annoyed the doctor. “Exactly as if he were going to give out a text,”
he thought. He drew off his glove and felt in his vest pocket. “Have a
troche, Kronborg,” he said, producing some. “Sent me for samples. Very
good for a rough throat.”

“Ah, thank you, thank you. I was in something of a hurry. I neglected
to put on my overshoes. Here we are, doctor.” Kronborg opened his front
door—seemed delighted to be at home again.

The front hall was dark and cold; the hatrack was hung with an
astonishing number of children’s hats and caps and cloaks. They were
even piled on the table beneath the hatrack. Under the table was a heap
of rubbers and overshoes. While the doctor hung up his coat and hat,
Peter Kronborg opened the door into the living-room. A glare of light
greeted them, and a rush of hot, stale air, smelling of warming
flannels.

At three o’clock in the morning Dr. Archie was in the parlor putting on
his cuffs and coat—there was no spare bedroom in that house. Peter
Kronborg’s seventh child, a boy, was being soothed and cosseted by his
aunt, Mrs. Kronborg was asleep, and the doctor was going home. But he
wanted first to speak to Kronborg, who, coatless and fluttery, was
pouring coal into the kitchen stove. As the doctor crossed the
dining-room he paused and listened. From one of the wing rooms, off to
the left, he heard rapid, distressed breathing. He went to the kitchen
door.

“One of the children sick in there?” he asked, nodding toward the
partition.

Kronborg hung up the stove-lifter and dusted his fingers. “It must be
Thea. I meant to ask you to look at her. She has a croupy cold. But in
my excitement—Mrs. Kronborg is doing finely, eh, doctor? Not many of
your patients with such a constitution, I expect.”

“Oh, yes. She’s a fine mother.” The doctor took up the lamp from the
kitchen table and unceremoniously went into the wing room. Two chubby
little boys were asleep in a double bed, with the coverlids over their
noses and their feet drawn up. In a single bed, next to theirs, lay a
little girl of eleven, wide awake, two yellow braids sticking up on the
pillow behind her. Her face was scarlet and her eyes were blazing.

The doctor shut the door behind him. “Feel pretty sick, Thea?” he asked
as he took out his thermometer. “Why didn’t you call somebody?”

She looked at him with greedy affection. “I thought you were here,” she
spoke between quick breaths. “There is a new baby, isn’t there? Which?”

“Which?” repeated the doctor.

“Brother or sister?”

He smiled and sat down on the edge of the bed. “Brother,” he said,
taking her hand. “Open.”

“Good. Brothers are better,” she murmured as he put the glass tube
under her tongue.

“Now, be still, I want to count.” Dr. Archie reached for her hand and
took out his watch. When he put her hand back under the quilt he went
over to one of the windows—they were both tight shut—and lifted it a
little way. He reached up and ran his hand along the cold, unpapered
wall. “Keep under the covers; I’ll come back to you in a moment,” he
said, bending over the glass lamp with his thermometer. He winked at
her from the door before he shut it.

Peter Kronborg was sitting in his wife’s room, holding the bundle which
contained his son. His air of cheerful importance, his beard and
glasses, even his shirt-sleeves, annoyed the doctor. He beckoned
Kronborg into the living-room and said sternly:—

“You’ve got a very sick child in there. Why didn’t you call me before?
It’s pneumonia, and she must have been sick for several days. Put the
baby down somewhere, please, and help me make up the bed-lounge here in
the parlor. She’s got to be in a warm room, and she’s got to be quiet.
You must keep the other children out. Here, this thing opens up, I
see,” swinging back the top of the carpet lounge. “We can lift her
mattress and carry her in just as she is. I don’t want to disturb her
more than is necessary.”

Kronborg was all concern immediately. The two men took up the mattress
and carried the sick child into the parlor. “I’ll have to go down to my
office to get some medicine, Kronborg. The drug store won’t be open.
Keep the covers on her. I won’t be gone long. Shake down the stove and
put on a little coal, but not too much; so it’ll catch quickly, I mean.
Find an old sheet for me, and put it there to warm.”

The doctor caught his coat and hurried out into the dark street. Nobody
was stirring yet, and the cold was bitter. He was tired and hungry and
in no mild humor. “The idea!” he muttered; “to be such an ass at his
age, about the seventh! And to feel no responsibility about the little
girl. Silly old goat! The baby would have got into the world somehow;
they always do. But a nice little girl like that—she’s worth the whole
litter. Where she ever got it from—” He turned into the Duke Block and
ran up the stairs to his office.

Thea Kronborg, meanwhile, was wondering why she happened to be in the
parlor, where nobody but company—usually visiting preachers—ever slept.
She had moments of stupor when she did not see anything, and moments of
excitement when she felt that something unusual and pleasant was about
to happen, when she saw everything clearly in the red light from the
isinglass sides of the hard-coal burner—the nickel trimmings on the
stove itself, the pictures on the wall, which she thought very
beautiful, the flowers on the Brussels carpet, Czerny’s “Daily Studies”
which stood open on the upright piano. She forgot, for the time being,
all about the new baby.

When she heard the front door open, it occurred to her that the
pleasant thing which was going to happen was Dr. Archie himself. He
came in and warmed his hands at the stove. As he turned to her, she
threw herself wearily toward him, half out of her bed. She would have
tumbled to the floor had he not caught her. He gave her some medicine
and went to the kitchen for something he needed. She drowsed and lost
the sense of his being there. When she opened her eyes again, he was
kneeling before the stove, spreading something dark and sticky on a
white cloth, with a big spoon; batter, perhaps. Presently she felt him
taking off her nightgown. He wrapped the hot plaster about her chest.
There seemed to be straps which he pinned over her shoulders. Then he
took out a thread and needle and began to sew her up in it. That, she
felt, was too strange; she must be dreaming anyhow, so she succumbed to
her drowsiness.

Thea had been moaning with every breath since the doctor came back, but
she did not know it. She did not realize that she was suffering pain.
When she was conscious at all, she seemed to be separated from her
body; to be perched on top of the piano, or on the hanging lamp,
watching the doctor sew her up. It was perplexing and unsatisfactory,
like dreaming. She wished she could waken up and see what was going on.

The doctor thanked God that he had persuaded Peter Kronborg to keep out
of the way. He could do better by the child if he had her to himself.
He had no children of his own. His marriage was a very unhappy one. As
he lifted and undressed Thea, he thought to himself what a beautiful
thing a little girl’s body was,—like a flower. It was so neatly and
delicately fashioned, so soft, and so milky white. Thea must have got
her hair and her silky skin from her mother. She was a little Swede,
through and through. Dr. Archie could not help thinking how he would
cherish a little creature like this if she were his. Her hands, so
little and hot, so clever, too,—he glanced at the open exercise book on
the piano. When he had stitched up the flaxseed jacket, he wiped it
neatly about the edges, where the paste had worked out on the skin. He
put on her the clean nightgown he had warmed before the fire, and
tucked the blankets about her. As he pushed back the hair that had
fuzzed down over her eyebrows, he felt her head thoughtfully with the
tips of his fingers. No, he couldn’t say that it was different from any
other child’s head, though he believed that there was something very
different about her. He looked intently at her wide, flushed face,
freckled nose, fierce little mouth, and her delicate, tender chin—the
one soft touch in her hard little Scandinavian face, as if some fairy
godmother had caressed her there and left a cryptic promise. Her brows
were usually drawn together defiantly, but never when she was with Dr.
Archie. Her affection for him was prettier than most of the things that
went to make up the doctor’s life in Moonstone.

The windows grew gray. He heard a tramping on the attic floor, on the
back stairs, then cries: “Give me my shirt!” “Where’s my other
stocking?”

“I’ll have to stay till they get off to school,” he reflected, “or
they’ll be in here tormenting her, the whole lot of them.”




II


For the next four days it seemed to Dr. Archie that his patient might
slip through his hands, do what he might. But she did not. On the
contrary, after that she recovered very rapidly. As her father
remarked, she must have inherited the “constitution” which he was never
tired of admiring in her mother.

One afternoon, when her new brother was a week old, the doctor found
Thea very comfortable and happy in her bed in the parlor. The sunlight
was pouring in over her shoulders, the baby was asleep on a pillow in a
big rocking-chair beside her. Whenever he stirred, she put out her hand
and rocked him. Nothing of him was visible but a flushed, puffy
forehead and an uncompromisingly big, bald cranium. The door into her
mother’s room stood open, and Mrs. Kronborg was sitting up in bed
darning stockings. She was a short, stalwart woman, with a short neck
and a determined-looking head. Her skin was very fair, her face calm
and unwrinkled, and her yellow hair, braided down her back as she lay
in bed, still looked like a girl’s. She was a woman whom Dr. Archie
respected; active, practical, unruffled; goodhumored, but determined.
Exactly the sort of woman to take care of a flighty preacher. She had
brought her husband some property, too,—one fourth of her father’s
broad acres in Nebraska,—but this she kept in her own name. She had
profound respect for her husband’s erudition and eloquence. She sat
under his preaching with deep humility, and was as much taken in by his
stiff shirt and white neckties as if she had not ironed them herself by
lamplight the night before they appeared correct and spotless in the
pulpit. But for all this, she had no confidence in his administration
of worldly affairs. She looked to him for morning prayers and grace at
table; she expected him to name the babies and to supply whatever
parental sentiment there was in the house, to remember birthdays and
anniversaries, to point the children to moral and patriotic ideals. It
was her work to keep their bodies, their clothes, and their conduct in
some sort of order, and this she accomplished with a success that was a
source of wonder to her neighbors. As she used to remark, and her
husband admiringly to echo, she “had never lost one.” With all his
flightiness, Peter Kronborg appreciated the matter-of-fact, punctual
way in which his wife got her children into the world and along in it.
He believed, and he was right in believing, that the sovereign State of
Colorado was much indebted to Mrs. Kronborg and women like her.

Mrs. Kronborg believed that the size of every family was decided in
heaven. More modern views would not have startled her; they would
simply have seemed foolish—thin chatter, like the boasts of the men who
built the tower of Babel, or like Axel’s plan to breed ostriches in the
chicken yard. From what evidence Mrs. Kronborg formed her opinions on
this and other matters, it would have been difficult to say, but once
formed, they were unchangeable. She would no more have questioned her
convictions than she would have questioned revelation. Calm and even
tempered, naturally kind, she was capable of strong prejudices, and she
never forgave.

When the doctor came in to see Thea, Mrs. Kronborg was reflecting that
the washing was a week behind, and deciding what she had better do
about it. The arrival of a new baby meant a revision of her entire
domestic schedule, and as she drove her needle along she had been
working out new sleeping arrangements and cleaning days. The doctor had
entered the house without knocking, after making noise enough in the
hall to prepare his patients. Thea was reading, her book propped up
before her in the sunlight.

“Mustn’t do that; bad for your eyes,” he said, as Thea shut the book
quickly and slipped it under the covers.

Mrs. Kronborg called from her bed: “Bring the baby here, doctor, and
have that chair. She wanted him in there for company.”

Before the doctor picked up the baby, he put a yellow paper bag down on
Thea’s coverlid and winked at her. They had a code of winks and
grimaces. When he went in to chat with her mother, Thea opened the bag
cautiously, trying to keep it from crackling. She drew out a long bunch
of white grapes, with a little of the sawdust in which they had been
packed still clinging to them. They were called Malaga grapes in
Moonstone, and once or twice during the winter the leading grocer got a
keg of them. They were used mainly for table decoration, about
Christmas-time. Thea had never had more than one grape at a time
before. When the doctor came back she was holding the almost
transparent fruit up in the sunlight, feeling the pale-green skins
softly with the tips of her fingers. She did not thank him; she only
snapped her eyes at him in a special way which he understood, and, when
he gave her his hand, put it quickly and shyly under her cheek, as if
she were trying to do so without knowing it—and without his knowing it.

Dr. Archie sat down in the rocking-chair. “And how’s Thea feeling
to-day?”

He was quite as shy as his patient, especially when a third person
overheard his conversation. Big and handsome and superior to his fellow
townsmen as Dr. Archie was, he was seldom at his ease, and like Peter
Kronborg he often dodged behind a professional manner. There was
sometimes a contraction of embarrassment and self consciousness all
over his big body, which made him awkward—likely to stumble, to kick up
rugs, or to knock over chairs. If any one was very sick, he forgot
himself, but he had a clumsy touch in convalescent gossip.

Thea curled up on her side and looked at him with pleasure. “All right.
I like to be sick. I have more fun then than other times.”

“How’s that?”

“I don’t have to go to school, and I don’t have to practice. I can read
all I want to, and have good things,”—she patted the grapes. “I had
lots of fun that time I mashed my finger and you wouldn’t let Professor
Wunsch make me practice. Only I had to do left hand, even then. I think
that was mean.”

The doctor took her hand and examined the forefinger, where the nail
had grown back a little crooked. “You mustn’t trim it down close at the
corner there, and then it will grow straight. You won’t want it crooked
when you’re a big girl and wear rings and have sweethearts.”

She made a mocking little face at him and looked at his new scarf-pin.
“That’s the prettiest one you ev-ER had. I wish you’d stay a long while
and let me look at it. What is it?”

Dr. Archie laughed. “It’s an opal. Spanish Johnny brought it up for me
from Chihuahua in his shoe. I had it set in Denver, and I wore it
to-day for your benefit.”

Thea had a curious passion for jewelry. She wanted every shining stone
she saw, and in summer she was always going off into the sand hills to
hunt for crystals and agates and bits of pink chalcedony. She had two
cigar boxes full of stones that she had found or traded for, and she
imagined that they were of enormous value. She was always planning how
she would have them set.

“What are you reading?” The doctor reached under the covers and pulled
out a book of Byron’s poems. “Do you like this?”

She looked confused, turned over a few pages rapidly, and pointed to
“My native land, good-night.” “That,” she said sheepishly.

“How about ‘Maid of Athens’?”

She blushed and looked at him suspiciously. “I like ‘There was a sound
of revelry,’” she muttered.

The doctor laughed and closed the book. It was clumsily bound in padded
leather and had been presented to the Reverend Peter Kronborg by his
Sunday-School class as an ornament for his parlor table.

“Come into the office some day, and I’ll lend you a nice book. You can
skip the parts you don’t understand. You can read it in vacation.
Perhaps you’ll be able to understand all of it by then.”

Thea frowned and looked fretfully toward the piano. “In vacation I have
to practice four hours every day, and then there’ll be Thor to take
care of.” She pronounced it “Tor.”

“Thor? Oh, you’ve named the baby Thor?” exclaimed the doctor.

Thea frowned again, still more fiercely, and said quickly, “That’s a
nice name, only maybe it’s a little—old fashioned.” She was very
sensitive about being thought a foreigner, and was proud of the fact
that, in town, her father always preached in English; very bookish
English, at that, one might add.

Born in an old Scandinavian colony in Minnesota, Peter Kronborg had
been sent to a small divinity school in Indiana by the women of a
Swedish evangelical mission, who were convinced of his gifts and who
skimped and begged and gave church suppers to get the long, lazy youth
through the seminary. He could still speak enough Swedish to exhort and
to bury the members of his country church out at Copper Hole, and he
wielded in his Moonstone pulpit a somewhat pompous English vocabulary
he had learned out of books at college. He always spoke of “the infant
Saviour,” “our Heavenly Father,” etc. The poor man had no natural,
spontaneous human speech. If he had his sincere moments, they were
perforce inarticulate. Probably a good deal of his pretentiousness was
due to the fact that he habitually expressed himself in a book learned
language, wholly remote from anything personal, native, or homely. Mrs.
Kronborg spoke Swedish to her own sisters and to her sister-in-law
Tillie, and colloquial English to her neighbors. Thea, who had a rather
sensitive ear, until she went to school never spoke at all, except in
monosyllables, and her mother was convinced that she was tongue-tied.
She was still inept in speech for a child so intelligent. Her ideas
were usually clear, but she seldom attempted to explain them, even at
school, where she excelled in “written work” and never did more than
mutter a reply.

“Your music professor stopped me on the street to-day and asked me how
you were,” said the doctor, rising. “He’ll be sick himself, trotting
around in this slush with no overcoat or overshoes.”

“He’s poor,” said Thea simply.

The doctor sighed. “I’m afraid he’s worse than that. Is he always all
right when you take your lessons? Never acts as if he’d been drinking?”

Thea looked angry and spoke excitedly. “He knows a lot. More than
anybody. I don’t care if he does drink; he’s old and poor.” Her voice
shook a little.

Mrs. Kronborg spoke up from the next room. “He’s a good teacher,
doctor. It’s good for us he does drink. He’d never be in a little place
like this if he didn’t have some weakness. These women that teach music
around here don’t know nothing. I wouldn’t have my child wasting time
with them. If Professor Wunsch goes away, Thea’ll have nobody to take
from. He’s careful with his scholars; he don’t use bad language. Mrs.
Kohler is always present when Thea takes her lesson. It’s all right.”
Mrs. Kronborg spoke calmly and judicially. One could see that she had
thought the matter out before.

“I’m glad to hear that, Mrs. Kronborg. I wish we could get the old man
off his bottle and keep him tidy. Do you suppose if I gave you an old
overcoat you could get him to wear it?” The doctor went to the bedroom
door and Mrs. Kronborg looked up from her darning.

“Why, yes, I guess he’d be glad of it. He’ll take most anything from
me. He won’t buy clothes, but I guess he’d wear ’em if he had ’em. I’ve
never had any clothes to give him, having so many to make over for.”

“I’ll have Larry bring the coat around to-night. You aren’t cross with
me, Thea?” taking her hand.

Thea grinned warmly. “Not if you give Professor Wunsch a coat—and
things,” she tapped the grapes significantly. The doctor bent over and
kissed her.




III


Being sick was all very well, but Thea knew from experience that
starting back to school again was attended by depressing difficulties.
One Monday morning she got up early with Axel and Gunner, who shared
her wing room, and hurried into the back living-room, between the
dining-room and the kitchen. There, beside a soft-coal stove, the
younger children of the family undressed at night and dressed in the
morning. The older daughter, Anna, and the two big boys slept upstairs,
where the rooms were theoretically warmed by stovepipes from below. The
first (and the worst!) thing that confronted Thea was a suit of clean,
prickly red flannel, fresh from the wash. Usually the torment of
breaking in a clean suit of flannel came on Sunday, but yesterday, as
she was staying in the house, she had begged off. Their winter
underwear was a trial to all the children, but it was bitterest to Thea
because she happened to have the most sensitive skin. While she was
tugging it on, her Aunt Tillie brought in warm water from the boiler
and filled the tin pitcher. Thea washed her face, brushed and braided
her hair, and got into her blue cashmere dress. Over this she buttoned
a long apron, with sleeves, which would not be removed until she put on
her cloak to go to school. Gunner and Axel, on the soap box behind the
stove, had their usual quarrel about which should wear the tightest
stockings, but they exchanged reproaches in low tones, for they were
wholesomely afraid of Mrs. Kronborg’s rawhide whip. She did not
chastise her children often, but she did it thoroughly. Only a somewhat
stern system of discipline could have kept any degree of order and
quiet in that overcrowded house.

Mrs. Kronborg’s children were all trained to dress themselves at the
earliest possible age, to make their own beds,—the boys as well as the
girls,—to take care of their clothes, to eat what was given them, and
to keep out of the way. Mrs. Kronborg would have made a good chess
player; she had a head for moves and positions.

Anna, the elder daughter, was her mother’s lieutenant. All the children
knew that they must obey Anna, who was an obstinate contender for
proprieties and not always fair minded. To see the young Kronborgs
headed for Sunday School was like watching a military drill. Mrs.
Kronborg let her children’s minds alone. She did not pry into their
thoughts or nag them. She respected them as individuals, and outside of
the house they had a great deal of liberty. But their communal life was
definitely ordered.

In the winter the children breakfasted in the kitchen; Gus and Charley
and Anna first, while the younger children were dressing. Gus was
nineteen and was a clerk in a dry-goods store. Charley, eighteen months
younger, worked in a feed store. They left the house by the kitchen
door at seven o’clock, and then Anna helped her Aunt Tillie get the
breakfast for the younger ones. Without the help of this sister-in-law,
Tillie Kronborg, Mrs. Kronborg’s life would have been a hard one. Mrs.
Kronborg often reminded Anna that “no hired help would ever have taken
the same interest.”

Mr. Kronborg came of a poorer stock than his wife; from a lowly,
ignorant family that had lived in a poor part of Sweden. His
great-grandfather had gone to Norway to work as a farm laborer and had
married a Norwegian girl. This strain of Norwegian blood came out
somewhere in each generation of the Kronborgs. The intemperance of one
of Peter Kronborg’s uncles, and the religious mania of another, had
been alike charged to the Norwegian grandmother. Both Peter Kronborg
and his sister Tillie were more like the Norwegian root of the family
than like the Swedish, and this same Norwegian strain was strong in
Thea, though in her it took a very different character.

Tillie was a queer, addle-pated thing, as flighty as a girl at
thirty-five, and overweeningly fond of gay clothes—which taste, as Mrs.
Kronborg philosophically said, did nobody any harm. Tillie was always
cheerful, and her tongue was still for scarcely a minute during the
day. She had been cruelly overworked on her father’s Minnesota farm
when she was a young girl, and she had never been so happy as she was
now; had never before, as she said, had such social advantages. She
thought her brother the most important man in Moonstone. She never
missed a church service, and, much to the embarrassment of the
children, she always “spoke a piece” at the Sunday-School concerts. She
had a complete set of “Standard Recitations,” which she conned on
Sundays. This morning, when Thea and her two younger brothers sat down
to breakfast, Tillie was remonstrating with Gunner because he had not
learned a recitation assigned to him for George Washington Day at
school. The unmemorized text lay heavily on Gunner’s conscience as he
attacked his buckwheat cakes and sausage. He knew that Tillie was in
the right, and that “when the day came he would be ashamed of himself.”

“I don’t care,” he muttered, stirring his coffee; “they oughtn’t to
make boys speak. It’s all right for girls. They like to show off.”

“No showing off about it. Boys ought to like to speak up for their
country. And what was the use of your father buying you a new suit, if
you’re not going to take part in anything?”

“That was for Sunday-School. I’d rather wear my old one, anyhow. Why
didn’t they give the piece to Thea?” Gunner grumbled.

Tillie was turning buckwheat cakes at the griddle. “Thea can play and
sing, she don’t need to speak. But you’ve got to know how to do
something, Gunner, that you have. What are you going to do when you git
big and want to git into society, if you can’t do nothing? Everybody’ll
say, ‘Can you sing? Can you play? Can you speak? Then git right out of
society.’ An’ that’s what they’ll say to you, Mr. Gunner.”

Gunner and Alex grinned at Anna, who was preparing her mother’s
breakfast. They never made fun of Tillie, but they understood well
enough that there were subjects upon which her ideas were rather
foolish. When Tillie struck the shallows, Thea was usually prompt in
turning the conversation.

“Will you and Axel let me have your sled at recess?” she asked.

“All the time?” asked Gunner dubiously.

“I’ll work your examples for you to-night, if you do.”

“Oh, all right. There’ll be a lot of ’em.”

“I don’t mind, I can work ’em fast. How about yours, Axel?”

Axel was a fat little boy of seven, with pretty, lazy blue eyes. “I
don’t care,” he murmured, buttering his last buckwheat cake without
ambition; “too much trouble to copy ’em down. Jenny Smiley’ll let me
have hers.”

The boys were to pull Thea to school on their sled, as the snow was
deep. The three set off together. Anna was now in the high school, and
she no longer went with the family party, but walked to school with
some of the older girls who were her friends, and wore a hat, not a
hood like Thea.




IV


“And it was Summer, beautiful Summer!” Those were the closing words of
Thea’s favorite fairy tale, and she thought of them as she ran out into
the world one Saturday morning in May, her music book under her arm.
She was going to the Kohlers’ to take her lesson, but she was in no
hurry.

It was in the summer that one really lived. Then all the little
overcrowded houses were opened wide, and the wind blew through them
with sweet, earthy smells of garden-planting. The town looked as if it
had just been washed. People were out painting their fences. The
cottonwood trees were a-flicker with sticky, yellow little leaves, and
the feathery tamarisks were in pink bud. With the warm weather came
freedom for everybody. People were dug up, as it were. The very old
people, whom one had not seen all winter, came out and sunned
themselves in the yard. The double windows were taken off the houses,
the tormenting flannels in which children had been encased all winter
were put away in boxes, and the youngsters felt a pleasure in the cool
cotton things next their skin.

Thea had to walk more than a mile to reach the Kohlers’ house, a very
pleasant mile out of town toward the glittering sand hills,—yellow this
morning, with lines of deep violet where the clefts and valleys were.
She followed the sidewalk to the depot at the south end of the town;
then took the road east to the little group of adobe houses where the
Mexicans lived, then dropped into a deep ravine; a dry sand creek,
across which the railroad track ran on a trestle. Beyond that gulch, on
a little rise of ground that faced the open sandy plain, was the
Kohlers’ house, where Professor Wunsch lived. Fritz Kohler was the town
tailor, one of the first settlers. He had moved there, built a little
house and made a garden, when Moonstone was first marked down on the
map. He had three sons, but they now worked on the railroad and were
stationed in distant cities. One of them had gone to work for the Santa
Fé, and lived in New Mexico.

Mrs. Kohler seldom crossed the ravine and went into the town except at
Christmas-time, when she had to buy presents and Christmas cards to
send to her old friends in Freeport, Illinois. As she did not go to
church, she did not possess such a thing as a hat. Year after year she
wore the same red hood in winter and a black sunbonnet in summer. She
made her own dresses; the skirts came barely to her shoe-tops, and were
gathered as full as they could possibly be to the waistband. She
preferred men’s shoes, and usually wore the cast-offs of one of her
sons. She had never learned much English, and her plants and shrubs
were her companions. She lived for her men and her garden. Beside that
sand gulch, she had tried to reproduce a bit of her own village in the
Rhine Valley. She hid herself behind the growth she had fostered, lived
under the shade of what she had planted and watered and pruned. In the
blaze of the open plain she was stupid and blind like an owl. Shade,
shade; that was what she was always planning and making. Behind the
high tamarisk hedge, her garden was a jungle of verdure in summer.
Above the cherry trees and peach trees and golden plums stood the
windmill, with its tank on stilts, which kept all this verdure alive.
Outside, the sage-brush grew up to the very edge of the garden, and the
sand was always drifting up to the tamarisks.

Every one in Moonstone was astonished when the Kohlers took the
wandering music-teacher to live with them. In seventeen years old Fritz
had never had a crony, except the harness-maker and Spanish Johnny.
This Wunsch came from God knew where,—followed Spanish Johnny into town
when that wanderer came back from one of his tramps. Wunsch played in
the dance orchestra, tuned pianos, and gave lessons. When Mrs. Kohler
rescued him, he was sleeping in a dirty, unfurnished room over one of
the saloons, and he had only two shirts in the world. Once he was under
her roof, the old woman went at him as she did at her garden. She sewed
and washed and mended for him, and made him so clean and respectable
that he was able to get a large class of pupils and to rent a piano. As
soon as he had money ahead, he sent to the Narrow Gauge lodging-house,
in Denver, for a trunkful of music which had been held there for unpaid
board. With tears in his eyes the old man—he was not over fifty, but
sadly battered—told Mrs. Kohler that he asked nothing better of God
than to end his days with her, and to be buried in the garden, under
her linden trees. They were not American basswood, but the European
linden, which has honey-colored blooms in summer, with a fragrance that
surpasses all trees and flowers and drives young people wild with joy.

Thea was reflecting as she walked along that had it not been for
Professor Wunsch she might have lived on for years in Moonstone without
ever knowing the Kohlers, without ever seeing their garden or the
inside of their house. Besides the cuckoo clock,—which was wonderful
enough, and which Mrs. Kohler said she kept for “company when she was
lonesome,”—the Kohlers had in their house the most wonderful thing Thea
had ever seen—but of that later.

Professor Wunsch went to the houses of his other pupils to give them
their lessons, but one morning he told Mrs. Kronborg that Thea had
talent, and that if she came to him he could teach her in his slippers,
and that would be better. Mrs. Kronborg was a strange woman. That word
“talent,” which no one else in Moonstone, not even Dr. Archie, would
have understood, she comprehended perfectly. To any other woman there,
it would have meant that a child must have her hair curled every day
and must play in public. Mrs. Kronborg knew it meant that Thea must
practice four hours a day. A child with talent must be kept at the
piano, just as a child with measles must be kept under the blankets.
Mrs. Kronborg and her three sisters had all studied piano, and all sang
well, but none of them had talent. Their father had played the oboe in
an orchestra in Sweden, before he came to America to better his
fortunes. He had even known Jenny Lind. A child with talent had to be
kept at the piano; so twice a week in summer and once a week in winter
Thea went over the gulch to the Kohlers’, though the Ladies’ Aid
Society thought it was not proper for their preacher’s daughter to go
“where there was so much drinking.” Not that the Kohler sons ever so
much as looked at a glass of beer. They were ashamed of their old folks
and got out into the world as fast as possible; had their clothes made
by a Denver tailor and their necks shaved up under their hair and
forgot the past. Old Fritz and Wunsch, however, indulged in a friendly
bottle pretty often. The two men were like comrades; perhaps the bond
between them was the glass wherein lost hopes are found; perhaps it was
common memories of another country; perhaps it was the grapevine in the
garden—knotty, fibrous shrub, full of homesickness and sentiment, which
the Germans have carried around the world with them.

As Thea approached the house she peeped between the pink sprays of the
tamarisk hedge and saw the Professor and Mrs. Kohler in the garden,
spading and raking. The garden looked like a relief-map now, and gave
no indication of what it would be in August; such a jungle! Pole beans
and potatoes and corn and leeks and kale and red cabbage—there would
even be vegetables for which there is no American name. Mrs. Kohler was
always getting by mail packages of seeds from Freeport and from the old
country. Then the flowers! There were big sunflowers for the canary
bird, tiger lilies and phlox and zinnias and lady’s-slippers and
portulaca and hollyhocks,—giant hollyhocks. Beside the fruit trees
there was a great umbrella-shaped catalpa, and a balm-of-Gilead, two
lindens, and even a ginka,—a rigid, pointed tree with leaves shaped
like butterflies, which shivered, but never bent to the wind.

This morning Thea saw to her delight that the two oleander trees, one
white and one red, had been brought up from their winter quarters in
the cellar. There is hardly a German family in the most arid parts of
Utah, New Mexico, Arizona, but has its oleander trees. However loutish
the American-born sons of the family may be, there was never one who
refused to give his muscle to the back-breaking task of getting those
tubbed trees down into the cellar in the fall and up into the sunlight
in the spring. They may strive to avert the day, but they grapple with
the tub at last.

When Thea entered the gate, her professor leaned his spade against the
white post that supported the turreted dove-house, and wiped his face
with his shirt-sleeve; someway he never managed to have a handkerchief
about him. Wunsch was short and stocky, with something rough and
bear-like about his shoulders. His face was a dark, bricky red, deeply
creased rather than wrinkled, and the skin was like loose leather over
his neck band—he wore a brass collar button but no collar. His hair was
cropped close; iron-gray bristles on a bullet-like head. His eyes were
always suffused and bloodshot. He had a coarse, scornful mouth, and
irregular, yellow teeth, much worn at the edges. His hands were square
and red, seldom clean, but always alive, impatient, even sympathetic.

“_Morgen_,” he greeted his pupil in a businesslike way, put on a black
alpaca coat, and conducted her at once to the piano in Mrs. Kohler’s
sitting-room. He twirled the stool to the proper height, pointed to it,
and sat down in a wooden chair beside Thea.

“The scale of B flat major,” he directed, and then fell into an
attitude of deep attention. Without a word his pupil set to work.

To Mrs. Kohler, in the garden, came the cheerful sound of effort, of
vigorous striving. Unconsciously she wielded her rake more lightly.
Occasionally she heard the teacher’s voice. “Scale of E minor....
_Weiter, weiter!... Immer_ I hear the thumb, like a lame foot.
_Weiter... weiter_, once... _Schön!_ The chords, quick!”

The pupil did not open her mouth until they began the second movement
of the Clementi sonata, when she remonstrated in low tones about the
way he had marked the fingering of a passage.

“It makes no matter what you think,” replied her teacher coldly. “There
is only one right way. The thumb there. _Ein, zwei, drei, vier_,” etc.
Then for an hour there was no further interruption.

At the end of the lesson Thea turned on her stool and leaned her arm on
the keyboard. They usually had a little talk after the lesson.

Herr Wunsch grinned. “How soon is it you are free from school? Then we
make ahead faster, eh?”

“First week in June. Then will you give me the ‘Invitation to the
Dance’?”

He shrugged his shoulders. “It makes no matter. If you want him, you
play him out of lesson hours.”

“All right.” Thea fumbled in her pocket and brought out a crumpled slip
of paper. “What does this mean, please? I guess it’s Latin.”

Wunsch blinked at the line penciled on the paper. “Wherefrom you get
this?” he asked gruffly.

“Out of a book Dr. Archie gave me to read. It’s all English but that.
Did you ever see it before?” she asked, watching his face.

“Yes. A long time ago,” he muttered, scowling. “Ovidius!” He took a
stub of lead pencil from his vest pocket, steadied his hand by a
visible effort, and under the words:

“Lente currite, lente currite, noctis equi,”


he wrote in a clear, elegant Gothic hand,—

“Go slowly, go slowly, ye steeds of the night.”


He put the pencil back in his pocket and continued to stare at the
Latin. It recalled the poem, which he had read as a student, and
thought very fine. There were treasures of memory which no
lodging-house keeper could attach. One carried things about in one’s
head, long after one’s linen could be smuggled out in a tuning-bag. He
handed the paper back to Thea. “There is the English, quite elegant,”
he said, rising.

Mrs. Kohler stuck her head in at the door, and Thea slid off the stool.
“Come in, Mrs. Kohler,” she called, “and show me the piece-picture.”

The old woman laughed, pulled off her big gardening gloves, and pushed
Thea to the lounge before the object of her delight. The
“piece-picture,” which hung on the wall and nearly covered one whole
end of the room, was the handiwork of Fritz Kohler. He had learned his
trade under an old-fashioned tailor in Magdeburg who required from each
of his apprentices a thesis: that is, before they left his shop, each
apprentice had to copy in cloth some well known German painting,
stitching bits of colored stuff together on a linen background; a kind
of mosaic. The pupil was allowed to select his subject, and Fritz
Kohler had chosen a popular painting of Napoleon’s retreat from Moscow.
The gloomy Emperor and his staff were represented as crossing a stone
bridge, and behind them was the blazing city, the walls and fortresses
done in gray cloth with orange tongues of flame darting about the domes
and minarets. Napoleon rode his white horse; Murat, in Oriental dress,
a bay charger. Thea was never tired of examining this work, of hearing
how long it had taken Fritz to make it, how much it had been admired,
and what narrow escapes it had had from moths and fire. Silk, Mrs.
Kohler explained, would have been much easier to manage than woolen
cloth, in which it was often hard to get the right shades. The reins of
the horses, the wheels of the spurs, the brooding eyebrows of the
Emperor, Murat’s fierce mustaches, the great shakos of the Guard, were
all worked out with the minutest fidelity. Thea’s admiration for this
picture had endeared her to Mrs. Kohler. It was now many years since
she used to point out its wonders to her own little boys. As Mrs.
Kohler did not go to church, she never heard any singing, except the
songs that floated over from Mexican Town, and Thea often sang for her
after the lesson was over. This morning Wunsch pointed to the piano.

“On Sunday, when I go by the church, I hear you sing something.”

Thea obediently sat down on the stool again and began, “_Come, ye
Disconsolate_.” Wunsch listened thoughtfully, his hands on his knees.
Such a beautiful child’s voice! Old Mrs. Kohler’s face relaxed in a
smile of happiness; she half closed her eyes. A big fly was darting in
and out of the window; the sunlight made a golden pool on the rag
carpet and bathed the faded cretonne pillows on the lounge, under the
piece-picture. “_Earth has no sorrow that Heaven cannot heal_,” the
song died away.

“That is a good thing to remember,” Wunsch shook himself. “You believe
that?” looking quizzically at Thea.

She became confused and pecked nervously at a black key with her middle
finger. “I don’t know. I guess so,” she murmured.

Her teacher rose abruptly. “Remember, for next time, thirds. You ought
to get up earlier.”

That night the air was so warm that Fritz and Herr Wunsch had their
after-supper pipe in the grape arbor, smoking in silence while the
sound of fiddles and guitars came across the ravine from Mexican Town.
Long after Fritz and his old Paulina had gone to bed, Wunsch sat
motionless in the arbor, looking up through the woolly vine leaves at
the glittering machinery of heaven.

“Lente currite, noctis equi.”


That line awoke many memories. He was thinking of youth; of his own, so
long gone by, and of his pupil’s, just beginning. He would even have
cherished hopes for her, except that he had become superstitious. He
believed that whatever he hoped for was destined not to be; that his
affection brought ill-fortune, especially to the young; that if he held
anything in his thoughts, he harmed it. He had taught in music schools
in St. Louis and Kansas City, where the shallowness and complacency of
the young misses had maddened him. He had encountered bad manners and
bad faith, had been the victim of sharpers of all kinds, was dogged by
bad luck. He had played in orchestras that were never paid and
wandering opera troupes which disbanded penniless. And there was always
the old enemy, more relentless than the others. It was long since he
had wished anything or desired anything beyond the necessities of the
body. Now that he was tempted to hope for another, he felt alarmed and
shook his head.

It was his pupil’s power of application, her rugged will, that
interested him. He had lived for so long among people whose sole
ambition was to get something for nothing that he had learned not to
look for seriousness in anything. Now that he by chance encountered it,
it recalled standards, ambitions, a society long forgot. What was it
she reminded him of? A yellow flower, full of sunlight, perhaps. No; a
thin glass full of sweet-smelling, sparkling Moselle wine. He seemed to
see such a glass before him in the arbor, to watch the bubbles rising
and breaking, like the silent discharge of energy in the nerves and
brain, the rapid florescence in young blood—Wunsch felt ashamed and
dragged his slippers along the path to the kitchen, his eyes on the
ground.




V


The children in the primary grades were sometimes required to make
relief maps of Moonstone in sand. Had they used colored sands, as the
Navajo medicine men do in their sand mosaics, they could easily have
indicated the social classifications of Moonstone, since these
conformed to certain topographical boundaries, and every child
understood them perfectly.

The main business street ran, of course, through the center of the
town. To the west of this street lived all the people who were, as
Tillie Kronborg said, “in society.” Sylvester Street, the third
parallel with Main Street on the west, was the longest in town, and the
best dwellings were built along it. Far out at the north end, nearly a
mile from the court-house and its cottonwood grove, was Dr. Archie’s
house, its big yard and garden surrounded by a white paling fence. The
Methodist Church was in the center of the town, facing the court-house
square. The Kronborgs lived half a mile south of the church, on the
long street that stretched out like an arm to the depot settlement.
This was the first street west of Main, and was built up only on one
side. The preacher’s house faced the backs of the brick and frame store
buildings and a draw full of sunflowers and scraps of old iron. The
sidewalk which ran in front of the Kronborgs’ house was the one
continuous sidewalk to the depot, and all the train men and roundhouse
employees passed the front gate every time they came uptown. Thea and
Mrs. Kronborg had many friends among the railroad men, who often paused
to chat across the fence, and of one of these we shall have more to
say.

In the part of Moonstone that lay east of Main Street, toward the deep
ravine which, farther south, wound by Mexican Town, lived all the
humbler citizens, the people who voted but did not run for office. The
houses were little story-and-a-half cottages, with none of the fussy
architectural efforts that marked those on Sylvester Street. They
nestled modestly behind their cottonwoods and Virginia creeper; their
occupants had no social pretensions to keep up. There were no
half-glass front doors with doorbells, or formidable parlors behind
closed shutters. Here the old women washed in the back yard, and the
men sat in the front doorway and smoked their pipes. The people on
Sylvester Street scarcely knew that this part of the town existed. Thea
liked to take Thor and her express wagon and explore these quiet, shady
streets, where the people never tried to have lawns or to grow elms and
pine trees, but let the native timber have its way and spread in
luxuriance. She had many friends there, old women who gave her a yellow
rose or a spray of trumpet vine and appeased Thor with a cooky or a
doughnut. They called Thea “that preacher’s girl,” but the
demonstrative was misplaced, for when they spoke of Mr. Kronborg they
called him “the Methodist preacher.”

Dr. Archie was very proud of his yard and garden, which he worked
himself. He was the only man in Moonstone who was successful at growing
rambler roses, and his strawberries were famous. One morning when Thea
was downtown on an errand, the doctor stopped her, took her hand and
went over her with a quizzical eye, as he nearly always did when they
met.

“You haven’t been up to my place to get any strawberries yet, Thea.
They’re at their best just now. Mrs. Archie doesn’t know what to do
with them all. Come up this afternoon. Just tell Mrs. Archie I sent
you. Bring a big basket and pick till you are tired.”

When she got home Thea told her mother that she didn’t want to go,
because she didn’t like Mrs. Archie.

“She is certainly one queer woman,” Mrs. Kronborg assented, “but he’s
asked you so often, I guess you’ll have to go this time. She won’t bite
you.”

After dinner Thea took a basket, put Thor in his baby buggy, and set
out for Dr. Archie’s house at the other end of town. As soon as she
came within sight of the house, she slackened her pace. She approached
it very slowly, stopping often to pick dandelions and sand-peas for
Thor to crush up in his fist.

It was his wife’s custom, as soon as Dr. Archie left the house in the
morning, to shut all the doors and windows to keep the dust out, and to
pull down the shades to keep the sun from fading the carpets. She
thought, too, that neighbors were less likely to drop in if the house
was closed up. She was one of those people who are stingy without
motive or reason, even when they can gain nothing by it. She must have
known that skimping the doctor in heat and food made him more
extravagant than he would have been had she made him comfortable. He
never came home for lunch, because she gave him such miserable scraps
and shreds of food. No matter how much milk he bought, he could never
get thick cream for his strawberries. Even when he watched his wife
lift it from the milk in smooth, ivory-colored blankets, she managed,
by some sleight-of-hand, to dilute it before it got to the breakfast
table. The butcher’s favorite joke was about the kind of meat he sold
Mrs. Archie. She felt no interest in food herself, and she hated to
prepare it. She liked nothing better than to have Dr. Archie go to
Denver for a few days—he often went chiefly because he was hungry—and
to be left alone to eat canned salmon and to keep the house shut up
from morning until night.

Mrs. Archie would not have a servant because, she said, “they ate too
much and broke too much”; she even said they knew too much. She used
what mind she had in devising shifts to minimize her housework. She
used to tell her neighbors that if there were no men, there would be no
housework. When Mrs. Archie was first married, she had been always in a
panic for fear she would have children. Now that her apprehensions on
that score had grown paler, she was almost as much afraid of having
dust in the house as she had once been of having children in it. If
dust did not get in, it did not have to be got out, she said. She would
take any amount of trouble to avoid trouble. Why, nobody knew.
Certainly her husband had never been able to make her out. Such little,
mean natures are among the darkest and most baffling of created things.
There is no law by which they can be explained. The ordinary incentives
of pain and pleasure do not account for their behavior. They live like
insects, absorbed in petty activities that seem to have nothing to do
with any genial aspect of human life.

Mrs. Archie, as Mrs. Kronborg said, “liked to gad.” She liked to have
her house clean, empty, dark, locked, and to be out of it—anywhere. A
church social, a prayer meeting, a ten-cent show; she seemed to have no
preference. When there was nowhere else to go, she used to sit for
hours in Mrs. Smiley’s millinery and notion store, listening to the
talk of the women who came in, watching them while they tried on hats,
blinking at them from her corner with her sharp, restless little eyes.
She never talked much herself, but she knew all the gossip of the town
and she had a sharp ear for racy anecdotes—“traveling men’s stories,”
they used to be called in Moonstone. Her clicking laugh sounded like a
typewriting machine in action, and, for very pointed stories, she had a
little screech.

Mrs. Archie had been Mrs. Archie for only six years, and when she was
Belle White she was one of the “pretty” girls in Lansing, Michigan. She
had then a train of suitors. She could truly remind Archie that “the
boys hung around her.” They did. They thought her very spirited and
were always saying, “Oh, that Belle White, she’s a case!” She used to
play heavy practical jokes which the young men thought very clever.
Archie was considered the most promising young man in “the young
crowd,” so Belle selected him. She let him see, made him fully aware,
that she had selected him, and Archie was the sort of boy who could not
withstand such enlightenment. Belle’s family were sorry for him. On his
wedding day her sisters looked at the big, handsome boy—he was
twenty-four—as he walked down the aisle with his bride, and then they
looked at each other. His besotted confidence, his sober, radiant face,
his gentle, protecting arm, made them uncomfortable. Well, they were
glad that he was going West at once, to fulfill his doom where they
would not be onlookers. Anyhow, they consoled themselves, they had got
Belle off their hands.

More than that, Belle seemed to have got herself off her hands. Her
reputed prettiness must have been entirely the result of determination,
of a fierce little ambition. Once she had married, fastened herself on
some one, come to port,—it vanished like the ornamental plumage which
drops away from some birds after the mating season. The one aggressive
action of her life was over. She began to shrink in face and stature.
Of her harum-scarum spirit there was nothing left but the little
screech. Within a few years she looked as small and mean as she was.

Thor’s chariot crept along. Thea approached the house unwillingly. She
didn’t care about the strawberries, anyhow. She had come only because
she did not want to hurt Dr. Archie’s feelings. She not only disliked
Mrs. Archie, she was a little afraid of her. While Thea was getting the
heavy baby-buggy through the iron gate she heard some one call, “Wait a
minute!” and Mrs. Archie came running around the house from the back
door, her apron over her head. She came to help with the buggy, because
she was afraid the wheels might scratch the paint off the gateposts.
She was a skinny little woman with a great pile of frizzy light hair on
a small head.

“Dr. Archie told me to come up and pick some strawberries,” Thea
muttered, wishing she had stayed at home.

Mrs. Archie led the way to the back door, squinting and shading her
eyes with her hand. “Wait a minute,” she said again, when Thea
explained why she had come.

She went into her kitchen and Thea sat down on the porch step. When
Mrs. Archie reappeared she carried in her hand a little wooden
butter-basket trimmed with fringed tissue paper, which she must have
brought home from some church supper. “You’ll have to have something to
put them in,” she said, ignoring the yawning willow basket which stood
empty on Thor’s feet. “You can have this, and you needn’t mind about
returning it. You know about not trampling the vines, don’t you?”

Mrs. Archie went back into the house and Thea leaned over in the sand
and picked a few strawberries. As soon as she was sure that she was not
going to cry, she tossed the little basket into the big one and ran
Thor’s buggy along the gravel walk and out of the gate as fast as she
could push it. She was angry, and she was ashamed for Dr. Archie. She
could not help thinking how uncomfortable he would be if he ever found
out about it. Little things like that were the ones that cut him most.
She slunk home by the back way, and again almost cried when she told
her mother about it.

Mrs. Kronborg was frying doughnuts for her husband’s supper. She
laughed as she dropped a new lot into the hot grease. “It’s wonderful,
the way some people are made,” she declared. “But I wouldn’t let that
upset me if I was you. Think what it would be to live with it all the
time. You look in the black pocketbook inside my handbag and take a
dime and go downtown and get an ice-cream soda. That’ll make you feel
better. Thor can have a little of the ice-cream if you feed it to him
with a spoon. He likes it, don’t you, son?” She stooped to wipe his
chin. Thor was only six months old and inarticulate, but it was quite
true that he liked ice-cream.




VI


Seen from a balloon, Moonstone would have looked like a Noah’s ark town
set out in the sand and lightly shaded by gray-green tamarisks and
cottonwoods. A few people were trying to make soft maples grow in their
turfed lawns, but the fashion of planting incongruous trees from the
North Atlantic States had not become general then, and the frail,
brightly painted desert town was shaded by the light-reflecting,
wind-loving trees of the desert, whose roots are always seeking water
and whose leaves are always talking about it, making the sound of rain.
The long porous roots of the cottonwood are irrepressible. They break
into the wells as rats do into granaries, and thieve the water.

The long street which connected Moonstone with the depot settlement
traversed in its course a considerable stretch of rough open country,
staked out in lots but not built up at all, a weedy hiatus between the
town and the railroad. When you set out along this street to go to the
station, you noticed that the houses became smaller and farther apart,
until they ceased altogether, and the board sidewalk continued its
uneven course through sunflower patches, until you reached the
solitary, new brick Catholic Church. The church stood there because the
land was given to the parish by the man who owned the adjoining waste
lots, in the hope of making them more salable—“Farrier’s Addition,”
this patch of prairie was called in the clerk’s office. An eighth of a
mile beyond the church was a washout, a deep sand-gully, where the
board sidewalk became a bridge for perhaps fifty feet. Just beyond the
gully was old Uncle Billy Beemer’s grove,—twelve town lots set out in
fine, well-grown cottonwood trees, delightful to look upon, or to
listen to, as they swayed and rippled in the wind. Uncle Billy had been
one of the most worthless old drunkards who ever sat on a store box and
told filthy stories. One night he played hide-and-seek with a switch
engine and got his sodden brains knocked out. But his grove, the one
creditable thing he had ever done in his life, rustled on. Beyond this
grove the houses of the depot settlement began, and the naked board
walk, that had run in out of the sunflowers, again became a link
between human dwellings.

One afternoon, late in the summer, Dr. Howard Archie was fighting his
way back to town along this walk through a blinding sandstorm, a silk
handkerchief tied over his mouth. He had been to see a sick woman down
in the depot settlement, and he was walking because his ponies had been
out for a hard drive that morning.

As he passed the Catholic Church he came upon Thea and Thor. Thea was
sitting in a child’s express wagon, her feet out behind, kicking the
wagon along and steering by the tongue. Thor was on her lap and she
held him with one arm. He had grown to be a big cub of a baby, with a
constitutional grievance, and he had to be continually amused. Thea
took him philosophically, and tugged and pulled him about, getting as
much fun as she could under her encumbrance. Her hair was blowing about
her face, and her eyes were squinting so intently at the uneven board
sidewalk in front of her that she did not see the doctor until he spoke
to her.

“Look out, Thea. You’ll steer that youngster into the ditch.”

The wagon stopped. Thea released the tongue, wiped her hot, sandy face,
and pushed back her hair. “Oh, no, I won’t! I never ran off but once,
and then he didn’t get anything but a bump. He likes this better than a
baby buggy, and so do I.”

“Are you going to kick that cart all the way home?”

“Of course. We take long trips; wherever there is a sidewalk. It’s no
good on the road.”

“Looks to me like working pretty hard for your