The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Dawn of Amateur Radio in the U.K. and Greece: A Personal View
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

*** This is a COPYRIGHTED Project Gutenberg eBook. Details Below. ***
***     Please follow the copyright guidelines in this file.      ***


Title: The Dawn of Amateur Radio in the U.K. and Greece: A Personal View

Author: Norman F. Joly


        
Release date: May 1, 1993 [eBook #66]
                Most recently updated: July 1, 2008

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/66


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DAWN OF AMATEUR RADIO IN THE U.K. AND GREECE: A PERSONAL VIEW ***















  The dawn of amateur radio in the U.K. and Greece: a personal view


  Norman F. Joly.

  COPYRIGHT 1990


  London : Joly, 1990. - 151p. - 0-9515628-0-0





                            C O N T E N T S

            0. PROLOGUE

            1. THE DEVELOPMENT OF ELECTRICITY

            2. THE BIRTH OF RADIO COMMUNICATIONS

            3. WHAT IS A RADIO AMATEUR?

            4. THE 1921 AMATEUR TRANSATLANTIC TESTS

            5. THE FIRST GREEK RADIO AMATEURS

            6. WORLD WAR II AND AFTER IN GREECE

            7. PIONEERS IN GREECE

            8. PERSONAL REMINISCENCES & ANECDOTES

            9. MISCELLANY

           10. GLOSSARY FOR NON-TECHNICAL READERS




                         Prologue


                     Thales of Miletus.

     Thales, who was born in 640 B.C., was a man of exceptional wisdom
and one of the Seven Sages of Ancient Greece. He was the father of
Greek, and consequently of European philosophy and science. His
speculations embraced a wide range of subjects relating to political
as well as to celestial matters. One must remember that even up to
the 18th century there was no clear distinction between philosophy and
science, both being products of the human mind in its attempts to
explain reality.

    Thales had studied astronomy in Egypt so he was able to draw up
accurate tables forecasting when the River Nile would be in flood.
But he first became widely known by anticipating an eclipse of the sun
for May 585 B.C., which happened to coincide with the final battle of
the war between the Lydians and the Persians. He had used some tables
drawn up by Babylonian astronomers, but he did not succeed in
forecasting the exact day (May 28th) or the hour of the spectacular
event.

    It can well be said that Thales was the first man ever recorded to
have cornered the market in a commodity: having foreseen a three-year
drought he bought up large quantities of olive oil and stored it for
sale at a later date.

    But who could possibly have imagined that one of Thales' original
speculations would affect the Radio Amateurs of the 20th Century?  He
believed that certain inanimate substances, like lodestones (magnetic
rocks) and the resin amber, possessed psyche (a soul).

     Many centuries had to elapse before this soul was identified as
static electricity and magnetism and harnessed for the generation of
mains electricity which dramatically altered the pattern of life on
our planet--and also led to the creation of our hobby of Amateur
Radio.

     About 400 years ago an English scientist called William Gilbert
(1544-1603), who had read about the unexplained observation of Thales,
also became interested in the intangible property and decided to call
it electricity, from the classical Greek word for amber, which is
electron.



                            CHAPTER ONE

                 THE DEVELOPMENT OF ELECTRICITY

    The phenomenon which Thales had observed and recorded five
centuries before the birth of Christ aroused the interest of many
scientists through the ages. They made various practical experiments
in their efforts to identify the elusive force which Thales had
likened to a 'soul' and which we now know to have been static
electricity.

    Of all forms of energy, electricity is the most baffling and
difficult to describe. An electric current cannot be seen. In fact
it does not exist outside the wires and other conductors which carry
it. A live wire carrying a current looks exactly the same and weighs
exactly the same as it does when it is not carrying a current. An
electric current is simply a movement or flow of electrons.

    Benjamin Franklin, the American statesman and scientist born in
Boston in 1706, investigated the nature of thunder and lightning by
flying a child's kite during a thunderstorm. He had attached a metal
spike to the kite, and at the other end of the string to which the
kite was tied he secured a key. As the rain soaked into the string,
electricity flowed freely down the string and Franklin was able to
draw large sparks from the key. Of course this could have been very
dangerous, but he had foreseen it and had supported the string through
an insulator. He observed that this electricity had the same
properties as the static electricity produced by friction.

    But long before Franklin many other scientists had carried out
research into the nature of electricity.

    In England William Gilbert (1544-1603) had noticed that the powers
of attraction and repulsion of two non-metallic rods which
he had rubbed briskly were similar to those of lodestone and amber--they
had acquired the curious quality we call magnetism. Remembering
Thales of old he coined the word 'electricity'.

    Otto von Guericke (1602-1686) a Mayor of Magdeburg in Germany, was
an amateur scientist who had constructed all manner of gadgets. One
of them was a machine consisting of two glass discs revolving in
opposite directions which produced high voltage charges through
friction. Ramsden and Wimshurst built improved versions of the
machine.

    A significant breakthrough occurred when Alessandro Volta
(1745-1827) in Italy constructed a simple electric cell (in 1799)
which produced a flow of electrons by chemical means. Two plates, one
of copper and the other of zinc, were placed in an acid solution and a
current flowed through an external wire connecting the two plates.
Later he connected cells in series (voltaic pile) which consisted of
alternate layers of zinc and copper discs separated by flannel discs
soaked in brine or acid which produced a higher electric pressure
(voltage). But Volta never found the right explanation of why his cell
was working. He thought the flow of electric current was due to the
contact between the two metals, whereas in fact it results from the
chemical action of the electrolyte on the zinc plate. However, his
discovery proved to be of incalculable value in research, as it
enabled scientists to carry out experiments which led to the
discoveries of the heating, lighting, chemical and magnetic effects of
electricity.

    One of the many scientists and physicists who took advantage of
the 'current electricity' made possible by Volta's cells was Hans
Christian Oersted (1777-1851) of Denmark. Like many others he was
looking for a connection between the age-old study of magnetism and
electricity, but now he was able to pass electric currents through
wires and place magnets in various positions near the wires. His
epoch-making discovery which established for the first time the
relationship between magnetism and electricity was in fact an
accident.

    While lecturing to students he showed them that the current
flowing in a wire held over a magnetic compass needle and at right
angles to it (that is east-west) had no effect on the needle.  Oersted
suggested to his assistant that he might try holding the wire parallel
to the length of the needle (north-south) and hey presto, the needle
was deflected! He had stumbled upon the electromagnetic effect in the
first recorded instance of a wire behaving like a magnet when a
current is passed through it.

   A development of Oersted's demonstration with the compass needle
was used to construct the world's first system of signaling by the
use of electricity.

   In 1837 Charles Wheatstone and William Cooke took out a patent for
the world's first Five-needle Telegraph, which was installed between
Paddington railway station in west London and West Drayton station a
few miles away.  The five copper wires required for this system were
embedded in blocks of wood.

    Electrolysis, the chemical decomposition of a substance into its
constituent elements by the action of an electric current, was
discovered by the English chemists Carlisle and William Nicholson
(1753-1815).  If an electric current is passed through water it is
broken down into the two elements of which it is composed--hydrogen
and oxygen.  The process is used extensively in modern industry for
electroplating.  Michael Faraday (1791-1867) who was employed as a
chemist at the Royal Institution, was responsible for introducing many
of the technical terms connected with electrolysis, like electrolyte
for the liquid through which the electric current is passed, and anode
and cathode for the positive and negative electrodes respectively.  He
also established the laws of the process itself.  But most people
remember his name in connection with his practical demonstration of
electromagnetic induction.

    In France Andre-Marie Ampere (1775-1836) carried out a complete
mathematical study of the laws which govern the interaction between
wires carrying electric currents.

    In Germany in 1826 a Bavarian schoolmaster Georg Ohm (1789-1854)
had defined the relationship between electric pressure (voltage),
current (flow rate) and resistance in a circuit (Ohm's law) but 16
years had to elapse before he received recognition for his work.

    Scientists were now convinced that since the flow of an electric
current in a wire or a coil of wire caused it to acquire magnetic
properties, the opposite might also prove to be true: a magnet could
possibly be used to generate a flow of electricity.

    Michael Faraday had worked on this problem for ten years when
finally, in 1830, he gave his famous lecture in which he demonstrated,
for the first time in history, the principle of electromagnetic
induction.  He had constructed powerful electromagnets consisting of
coils of wire.  When he caused the magnetic lines of force surrounding
one coil to rise and fall by interrupting or varying the flow of
current, a similar current was induced in a neighbouring coil closely
coupled to the first.

    The colossal importance of Faraday's discovery was that it paved
the way for the generation of electricity by mechanical means.
However, as can be seen from the drawing, the basic generator produces
an alternating flow of current.(A.C.)

    Rotating a coil of wire steadily through a complete revolution in
the steady magnetic field between the north and south poles of a
magnet results in an electromotive force (E.M.F.)  at its terminals
which rises in value, falls back to zero, reverses in a negative
direction, reaches a peak and again returns to zero.  This completes
one cycle or sine wave. (1Hz in S.I.units).

    In recent years other methods have been developed for generating
electrical power in relatively small quantities for special
applications.  Semiconductors, which combine heat insulation with good
electrical conduction, are used for thermoelectric generators to power
isolated weather stations, artificial satellites, undersea cables and
marker buoys.  Specially developed diode valves are used as thermionic
generators with an efficiency, at present, of only 20% but the heat
taken away from the anode is used to raise steam for conventional
power generation.

    Sir Humphry Davy (1778-1829) one of Britain's leading chemists of
the 18th century, is best remembered for his safety lamp for miners
which cut down the risk of methane gas explosions in mines.  It was
Davy who first demonstrated that electricity could be used to produce
light.  He connected two carbon rods to a heavy duty storage battery.
When he touched the tips of the rods together a very bright white
light was produced.  As he drew the rods apart, the arc light
persisted until the tips had burnt away to the critical gap which
extinguished the light.  As a researcher and lecturer at the Royal
Institution Davy worked closely with Michael Faraday who first joined
the institution as his manservant and later became his secretary.
Davy's crowning honour in the scientific world came in 1820, when he
was elected President of the Royal Society.

    In the U.S.A. the prolific inventor Thomas Alva Edison
(1847-1931) who had invented the incandescent carbon filament bulb,
built a number of electricity generators in the vicinity of the
Niagara Falls.  These used the power of the falling water to drive
hydraulic turbines which were coupled to the dynamos.  These
generators were fitted with a spinning switch or commutator (one of
the neatest gadgets Edison ever invented) to make the current flow in
unidirectional pulses (D.C.)  In 1876 all electrical equipment was
powered by direct current.

    Today mains electricity plays a vital part in our everyday lives
and its applications are widespread and staggering in their immensity.
But we must not forget that popular demand for this convenient form of
power arose only about 100 years ago, mainly for illumination.

    Recent experiments in superconductivity, using ceramic instead
metal conductors have given us an exciting glimpse into what might be
achieved for improving efficiency in the distribution of electric
power.

    Historians of the future may well characterise the 20th century as
'the century of electricity & electronics'. But Edison's D.C.
generators could not in themselves, have achieved the spectacular
progress that has been made.  All over the world we depend totally on
a system of transmitting mains electricity over long distances which
was originally created by an amazing inventor whose scientific
discoveries changed, and are still changing, the whole world.  His
name was scarcely known to the general public, especially in Europe,
where he was born.

    Who was this unknown pioneer?  Some people reckon that it was this
astonishing visionary who invented wireless, remote control, robotics
and a form of X-ray photography using high frequency radio waves.  A
patent which he took out in the U.S.A. in 1890 ultimately led to the
design of the humble ignition coil which energises billions and
billions of spark plugs in all the motor cars of the world.  His
American patents fill a book two inches thick.  His name was Nicola
Tesla (1856-1943).

    Nicola Tesla was born in a small village in Croatia which at that
time formed part of the great Austro-Hungarian Empire. Today it is a
northern province of Yugoslavia, a state created after the 1914-1918
war. Tesla studied at the Graz Technical University and later in
Budapest.  Early in his studies he had the idea that a way had to be
found to run electric motors directly from A.C.  generators.  His
professor in Graz had assured him categorically that this was not
possible.  But young Tesla was not convinced.  When he went to
Budapest he got a job in the Central Telegraph Office, and one evening
in 1882, as he was sitting on a bench in the City Park he had an
inspiration which ultimately led to the solution of the problem.

    Tesla remembered a poem by the German poet Goethe about the sun
which supports life on the earth and when the day is over moves on to
give life to the other side of the globe.  He picked up a twig and
began to scratch a drawing on the soil in front of him.  He drew four
coils arranged symmetrically round the circumference of a circle.  In
the centre he drew a rotor or armature.  As each coil in turn was
energised it attracted the rotor towards it and the rotary motion was
established.  When he constructed the first practical models he used
eight, sixteen and even more coils.  The simple drawing on the ground
led to the design of the first induction motor driven directly by
A.C.electricity.

    Tesla emigrated to the U.S.A. in 1884. During the first year he
filed no less than 30 patents mostly in relation to the generation and
distribution of A.C.  mains electricity.  He designed and built his
'A.C. Polyphase System' which generated three-phase alternating current
at 25 Hz.  One particular unit delivered 422 amperes at 12,000 volts.
The beauty of this system was that the voltage could be stepped down
using transformers for local use, or stepped up to many thousands of
volts for transmission over long distances through relatively thin
conductors.  Edison's generating stations were incapable of any such
thing.

    Tesla signed a lucrative contract with the famous railway engineer
George Westinghouse, the inventor of the Westinghouse Air Brake which
is used by most railways all over the world to the present day. Their
generating station was put into service in 1895 and was called the
Niagara Falls Electricity Generating Company. It supplied power for
the Westinghouse network of trains and also for an industrial complex
in Buffalo, New York.

    After ten years Tesla began to experiment with high frequencies.
The Tesla Coil which he had patented in 1890 was capable of raising
voltages to unheard of levels such as 300,000 volts.  Edison, who was
still generating D.C., claimed A.C. was dangerous and to prove it
contracted with the government to produce the first electric chair
using A.C. for the execution of murderers condemned to death.  When it
was first used it was a ghastly flop.  The condemned man moaned and
groaned and foamed at the mouth.  After four minutes of repeated
application of the A.C.voltage smoke began to come out of his back.
It was obvious that the victim had suffered a horribly drawn-out
death.

    Tesla said he could prove that A.C. was not dangerous.  He gave a
demonstration of high voltage electricity flowing harmlessly over his
body.  But in reality, he cheated, because he had used a frequency of
10,000 cycles (10 kHz) at extremely low current and because of the
skin effect suffered no harm.

    One of Tesla's patents related to a system of lighting using glass
tubes filled with fluorine (not neon) excited by H.F.voltages. His
workshop was lit by this method.  Several years before Wilhelm
Roentgen demonstrated his system of X-rays Tesla had been taking
photographs of the bones in his hand and his foot from up to 40 feet
away using H.F.currents.

    More astonishing still is the fact that in 1893, two years before
Marconi demonstrated his system of wireless signaling, Tesla had
built a model boat in which he combined power to drive it with radio
control and robotics.  He put the small boat in a lake in Madison
Square Gardens in New York. Standing on the shore with a control box,
he invited onlookers to suggest movements.  He was able to make the
boat go forwards and backwards and round in circles.  We all know how
model cars and aircraft are controlled by radio today, but when Tesla
did it a century ago the motor car had not been invented, and the only
method by which man could cover long distances was on horseback!

    Many people believe that a modification of Tesla's 'Magnifying
Transmitter' was used by the Soviet Union when suddenly one day in
October 1976 they produced an amazing noise which blotted out all
radio transmissions between 6 and 20 MHz.  (The Woodpecker) The
B.B.C., the N.B.C. and most broadcasting and telecommunication
organisations of the world complained to Moscow (the noise had
persisted continuously for 10 hours on the first day), but all the
Russians would say in reply was that they were carrying out an
experiment.  At first nobody seemed to know what they were doing
because it was obviously not intended as another form of jamming of
foreign broadcasts, an old Russian custom as we all know.

    It is believed that in the pursuit of his life's ambition to send
power through the earth without the use of wires, Tesla had achieved a
small measure of success at E.L.F.  (extremely low frequencies) of the
order of 7 to 12 Hz. These frequencies are at present used by the
military for communicating with submarines submerged in the oceans of
the world.

    Tesla's career and private life have remained something of a
mystery.  He lived alone and shunned public life.  He never read any
of his papers before academic institutions, though he was friendly
with some journalists who wrote sensational stories about him.  They
said he was terrified of microbes and that when he ate out at a
restaurant he would ask for a number of clean napkins to wipe the
cutlery and the glasses he drank out of.  For the last 20 years of his
life until he died during World War II in 1943 he lived the life of a
semi-recluse, with a pigeon as his only companion.  A disastrous fire
had destroyed his workshops and many of his experimental models and
all his papers were lost for ever.

    Tesla had moved to Colorado Springs where he built his largest
ever coil which was 52 feet in diameter.  He studied all the different
forms of lightning in his unsuccessful quest for the transmission of
power without wires.

    In Yugoslavia, Tesla is a national hero and a well-equipped museum
in Belgrade contains abundant proof of the genius of this
extraordinary man.



                            CHAPTER TWO

                THE BIRTH OF RADIO COMMUNICATIONS

    By 1850 most of the basic electrical phenomena had been
investigated.  However, James Clerk Maxwell (1831-1879), Professor of
Experimental Physics at Cambridge then came up with something entirely
new.  By some elegant mathematics he had shown the probable existence
of electromagnetic waves of radiation.  But it was twenty four years
later (eight years after Maxwell's death) that Heinrich Hertz
(1857-1894) in Germany gave a practical demonstration of the accuracy
of this theory.  He generated and detected electromagnetic waves
across the length of his laboratory on a wavelength of approximately
one metre. His own photograph of the equipment he had set up can be
seen in the Deutsches Museum in Munich.

    To detect the electromagnetic waves Hertz employed a simple form
of oscillator, which he termed a resonator.  But it was not sensitive
enough to detect waves at any great distance.  Before wireless
telegraphy could become practicable, a more delicate detector was
necessary.

    Credit is due to Edouard Branly (1844-1940) of France for
producing the first practical instrument for detecting Hertzian waves,
the coherer.  It consisted of two metal cylinders with leads attached,
fitted tightly into the interior of a glass tube containing iron or
steel filings.  The instant an electric discharge of any sort occurred
the coherer became conductive, and if it was tapped lightly its
conducting property was immediately destroyed.  In practice the
tapping was done automatically by a tapper which came into action the
moment the coherer became conductive.

    In Russia the physicist Aleksandr Popov (1859-1905) had used a
coherer while engaged in the investigation of the effects of lightning
discharges.  He suggested that such discharges could possibly be used
for signaling over long distances.  Old timers may remember that
about 50 years ago Russian amateurs used to send out a QSL card with a
drawing of Popov and a caption which claimed that he was 'the inventor
of radio'.

    In Italy, a young 22-year-old electrician became interested in
electromagnetic radiation after reading papers by Professor Augusto
Righi (1850-1921).  It was Guglielmo Marconi (1874-1937), the son of a
well-to-do landowner who lived in Bologna, and who was married to
Annie Jameson of the well known Irish Whiskey family. Guglielmo, their
second son, had his early education at a private school in Bedford,
England, and later at Livorno and Florence in Italy.  When he read
about the experiments of Heinrich Hertz and about Popov's suggestion,
he saw the possibility of using these waves as a means of signaling.
His first transmitter, shown in the accompanying photograph, did not
radiate very far.  When he folded the metal plate into a cylinder and
placed it on a pole 30 feet above the induction coil and connected to
it by a vertical wire, he was able to detect the radiation nearly two
kilometres away.  Marconi realised that his signaling system would be
most useful to shipping, and in those days England possessed the
world's greatest navy and the world's biggest merchant fleet.

   The Italian government was not interested in young Marconi's work,
so after a family conference he was brought to London by his mother,
who had influential relatives there.  Not only did they finance his
early experiments but they also put him in touch with the right sort
of people.  One of these was Alan A. Campbell Swinton who became the
first President of the Radio Society of London (now the R.S.G.B.) many
years later, in 1913.  Campbell Swinton introduced the young Italian
to William Preece, then Engineer-in-Chief of the British Post Office.
Preece had already been investigating various methods of 'induction'
telegraphy.

    In a book entitled Wireless Telegraphy published in 1908, William
J. White of the Engineer-in-Chief's department at the G.P.O. wrote,

          "The  work  of Sir (then Mr)  William  Preece, important
          though  it was,  did not attract the attention  of  the
          public  to  the extent that might have  been  expected.
          This  was  due  to  the  fact that  no  sooner  had  he
          demonstrated a method of wireless telegraphy which  was
          a commercial possibility than his system was superseded
          by another,  and a better one, brought to England by Mr
          Guglielmo  Marconi  in 1896.   The possibilities of  Mr
          Marconi's system were at once recognised by Mr  William
          Preece.   The experience of the elder and the genius of
          the younger man, who must be given the credit of having
          devised   the  first  practical  system  for   wireless
          telegraphy,  combined  to  turn  apparently  disastrous
          failures  into  success,  and now (in  1908),  wireless
          telegraphy has become,  in less than a decade, part and
          parcel of commercial and national life."

    The world's first patent for wireless telegraphy was awarded to
Marconi on the 2nd June 1896. In it he stated that "electrical action
can be transmitted through the earth, air or water, by means of
oscillations of high frequency."  In the first public demonstration of
his equipment Marconi spanned the 365 metres between the G.P.O.  and
Victoria street.  Later, on Salisbury Plain, in March 1897, his
signals were detected over 7 kilometres away.  On the 11th & 18th May
1897 messages were first exchanged over water.  On the 27th of March
1899, during naval manoeuvres, Marconi bridged the English Channel for
the first time, a distance of about 140 kilometres.  His transatlantic
triumph came on the 12th December 1901 when the morse letter 'S' was
transmitted from Poldhu, in Cornwall and received by Marconi himself
at St. John's, Newfoundland, who recorded the historic event in his
pocket book simply "Sigs at 12.20, 1.10 & 2.20".

    The operation of Marconi's transmitter was itself quite
spectacular.  To produce the oscillations he employed the oscillator
designed by Augusto Righi.  Depressing the key closed the circuit and
brought the inductor coil into action.  Vivid sparks occurred between
the balls of the oscillator, to the accompaniment of a succession of
sharp cracks, like the reports of a pistol, and some energy was sent
off the square metal plate in the form of trains of electromagnetic
waves, which radiated out in all directions.  But the energy occupied
a very large bandwidth and the receivers of that period could not
separate two transmissions.  William J. White of the Post Office wrote
in 1908, "The chief objection which has been raised against modern
wireless telegraphy is its want of secrecy.  With a transmitter
sending out waves in all directions, it is possible for unscrupulous
persons to receive the messages and make an improper use of them.
This form of 'scientific hooliganism' has, in fact, become somewhat
notorious.  When two or three transmitters are each sending out their
electromagnetic waves, the result, naturally, is utter confusion."
White added that the British Postal Administration was refusing to
grant licences for more than one system in the same area, in spite of
the fact that there had been some 'alleged' solutions of the problem.
The phenomenon of resonance was known and Dr (later Sir Oliver) Lodge
had taken out various patents between 1889 and 1898 in connection with
receivers.  Marconi and his assistants ultimately solved the problem
by modifying Lodge's syntonic Leyden jar tuned circuit.  They added a
tapped inductance in the aerial circuit of the transmitter and used
variable capacitors instead of fixed ones.  This was probably the most
significant modification made in the development of wireless
telegraphy.  (In Greek the word syntonismos 'to bring to equal tone'
is used for 'tuning'.)

   Apart from the patents taken out by Sir Oliver Lodge and Dr
Alexander Muirhead, in 1897, patents were taken out in Germany by
Professor Braun of Strasbourg, who was joined by Professor Slaby and
Count D'Arco in 1903 to form the Telefunken company, and in the U.S.A.
by Dr Lee De Forest of the American De Forest Wireless Telegraph
Company who was the first to use a high A.C.  voltage of 20,000 volts
to obtain the necessary high-potential discharges, thus dispensing
with the induction coil.  Again in the U.S.A., Professor R.O.Fessenden
was responsible for the design of new types of transmitting and
receiving apparatus.

   During this period Marconi had resisted all offers by financiers to
acquire his patents.  In July 1897 he entrusted his cousin Jameson
Davis to form The Wireless Telegraph & Signal Company Ltd which soon
became Marconi's Wireless Telegraph Co., and ultimately the Marconi
Company.

    William Preece of the Post Office detached one of his assistants,
George S.  Kemp, to help Marconi.  Kemp was destined to become his
right-hand man and served Marconi faithfully throughout his life. By
today's standards, Marconi can be said to have been a highly
successful entrepreneur.  He had the great knack of selecting the
right man for the job, and inspired deep loyalty in his staff.  He
regarded himself as an 'amateur' and often paid tribute to the work of
radio experimenters.

            (Most of the above passages are quoted from 'A History of
the Marconi Company' by W.J.Baker, published by Methuen & Co Ltd.
reprinted in 1979.)



                            CHAPTER THREE

                    THE RADIO AMATEUR MOVEMENT

      From the turn of the century enthusiastic young men who built
their own items of electrical and wireless apparatus were known as
"Wireless Experimenters".  Many of them were later granted licences
for the use of "Wireless Telegraphy for experimental purposes" (in the
United Kingdom) by the Postmaster General under the terms of the 1904
Wireless Telegraphy Act.  In his report to Parliament for the years
1905-1906 the P.M.G.  stated that it was his wish "to promote
experimental investigations in this promising field".

    In a book published in 1908 by R.P.Howgrave-Graham entitled
"Wireless Telegraphy for Amateurs" the word amateur seems to have been
used for the first time.

    During the 1914-1918 war all wireless apparatus in the possession
of licensed amateurs was closed down under the Defence of the Realm
Act of 1914.  Experimental transmission licences numbered 1,600.

    After the end of the war an Inter-Departmental Committee was set
up and in its report to the Postmaster General dated April 1919 it
stated: "We are of the opinion that the number of stations existing in
July 1914 was excessive from the point of view of government control
in case of emergency and the necessity of preventing interference with
government and commercial working; further there was no justification
for it from the point of view of the encouragement of research or
development of industry".

    But there was a magnanimous relaxation in the Defence Regulations
when the Post Office notified manufacturers of electrical apparatus
that restriction on the sale of buzzers had been removed. Buzzers
could now be sold without enquiry as to the use to which the purchaser
proposed to put them!!!

    During 1919 many issues of WIRELESS WORLD considered "the amateur
position", and a leading article in the March issue began with a
quotation attributed to Marconi:

          "I consider that the existence of a body of independent
      and  often  enthusiastic  amateurs constitutes  a  valuable
      asset   towards   the  further  development   of   wireless
      telegraphy."

    In a subsequent letter to the Editor Marconi wrote:

          "In  my  opinion  it  would be  a  mistaken  policy  to
      introduce  legislation  to prevent  amateurs  experimenting
      with  wireless  telegraphy  (which  the  authorities   were
      contemplating).  Had  it  not been for  amateurs,  wireless
      telegraphy as a great world-fact might not have existed  at
      all.  A  great  deal  of the development  and  progress  of
      wireless telegraphy is due to the efforts of amateurs."

    John Ambrose Fleming, the inventor of the diode valve, also wrote
to the Editor of W.W. as follows:

          "It  is a matter of common knowledge that a large  part
      of  the  important inventions in connection  with  wireless
      telegraphy  have  been  the work of  amateurs  and  private
      research  and  not  the outcome of official brains  or  the
      handiwork  of military or naval organisations.  In fact  we
      may  say that wireless telegraphy itself in  its  inception
      was an amateur product.  Numerous important inventions such
      as the crystal detector,  the oscillating valve, the triode
      valve--have been due to private or amateur work.  If full
      opportunities  for such non-official research work are  not
      restored,  the  progress of the art of radio telegraphy and
      radio telephony will be greatly hindered."

    Professor W.H. Eccles wrote:

          "Improvements  and invention must be stimulated to  the
      utmost.  It  is  not impossible to devise  laws  to  impose
      restrictions  upon  the emission of wireless waves as  will
      preclude interference with the public radio service of  the
      future   (R.F.I.   &  T.V.I.?!!)  and  yet  allow   liberal
      opportunities   for  the  experimental  study  of  wireless
      telegraphy."

    NOTE.  The above passages are taken from WORLD AT THEIR FINGERTIPS
by John Clarricoats, O.B.E., G6CL, published by the R.S.G.B. in 1968.



                            CHAPTER FOUR

                  THE 1921 TRANSATLANTIC TESTS

    Most commercial experimental transmissions in wireless telegraphy
before World War I were carried out on the "long" wavelengths, though
they were not called that at the time.  Transmissions by amateurs in
the United Kingdom and the U.S.A. on the other hand were made around
200 metres (1.5MHz).  In the U.S.A. amateurs were permitted to use a
D.C.input of 1,000 watts to the anode of the final stage of their
transmitters.  In the U.K.  the maximum power allowed was 10 watts and
the combined height and length of the transmitting aerial was not to
exceed 100 feet. So when the first attempt to span the Atlantic was
made in February of 1921 it was natural that the American stations
should do the transmitting and the Europeans the listening.

    About 25 U.S. amateur stations participated in the tests, which
took place early in the morning on the 2nd, 4th and 6th of February
1921. Although about 200 European stations had indicated their
intention to listen only 30 actually submitted logs.  And not a single
one of them was able to report hearing anything that could be
attributed to the American transmissions.

    The then Editor of QST wrote: "We have tested most of the circuits
used by the Britishers and find them one and all decidedly inferior to
our standard American regenerative circuit using variometer tuning in
secondary and tertiary circuits.  We would bet our new Spring hat that
if a good U.S. amateur with such a set and an Armstrong
superheterodyne could be sent to England, reception of the U.S.
transmissions would straightaway become commonplace." Strong language.

    In September of the same year it was announced that a prominent
U.S. amateur Paul Godley 2ZE would be going to Europe to take part in
the second series of tests planned for December. His expenses were
being paid by the A.R.R.L.  which already boasted having 15,000
transmitting members.  In the U.S.A.  distances of over 2,000 miles
had already been achieved.

    During his brief stay of a few hours in London Paul Godley was
introduced to Senator Marconi, to Admiral of the Fleet Sir Henry
Jackson, to Alan A. Campbell Swinton and many other distinguished
members of the Wireless Society of London, as the R.S.G.B. was then
called.

    Paul Godley first set up his receiving equipment at Wembley Park,
Middlesex but soon decided that the electrical noises in the area
would not permit reception of the weak transatlantic signals.  He
therefore obtained permission to set up the European receiving station
at Ardrossan a coast town near Glasgow, Scotland.  The actual site was
a large field heavily covered with seaweed.  He was assisted in the
erection of his receiving antenna by a member of the Marconi
International Marine Communications Company.  1,300 feet of
phosphor-bronze wire was stretched 12 feet above the ground on ten
poles spaced equally along the full length of the wire which was
earthed at the far end through a non-inductive resistor. This was the
first Beverage type receiving array ever erected in the United
Kingdom.  Before the actual tests took place the length of the wire
was reduced to 850 feet.

    At 00.50 GMT on December 9th 1921 Godley identified signals from
1BCG located at Greenwich, Connecticut. The station there was manned by
six members of the Radio Club of America.  One of the operators was
E. Howard Armstrong inventor of the regenerative detector,
super-regeneration and the supersonic heterodyne receiver, though the
French claim that the superhet was first designed by Lucien Levy of
Paris.

    Two days later the historic first complete message transmitted by
U.S. amateurs and received in Europe on the "short waves" (actually 230
metres) heralded a new era.  The message read:

          No.1 de 1BCG.  WORDS 12.  NEW YORK DECEMBER 11 1921. TO
          PAUL GODLEY ARDROSSAN SCOTLAND.  HEARTY
          CONGRATULATIONS. SIGNED BURGHARD INMAN GRINAN ARMSTRONG
          AMY CRONKHITE.

    Eight British amateurs had also copied the message correctly.  One
of them was W.E. "Bill" Corsham 2UV of Willesden, London who was later
credited by the R.S.G.B.  and the A.R.R.L.  as being the inventor of
the QSL card.  Bill had used a simple three valve receiver and an
inverted-L wire 100 feet long compared to Godley's huge Beverage
array.

    In the summer of 1922 amateurs in France began to get licences and
Leon Deloy 8AB President of the Radio Club of Nice in southern France
started hearing British stations.  After a visit to the U.S.A.  Deloy
was able to improve his equipment and on November 27th 1923 he
contacted Fred Schnell 1MO of West Hartford, Connecticut for the first
ever 2-way QSO across the Atlantic. They used the "useless"
wavelengths around 100 metres.

    INTERNATIONAL DX had come to stay.



                            CHAPTER FIVE

                 THE FIRST GREEK RADIO AMATEURS

    As no licences were issued for many years there are no official
records to be consulted.  Early activity was mainly in and around
Athens but there may have been one or two stations in other parts of
the country which we never heard in the capital.  At the time of
writing (1987) four of the original pioneers in the Athens area are
alive and three of them are currently active on the H.F. bands.

     Athanassis 'Takis' Coumbias has QSL cards addressed to him dated
1929 when he was a short wave listener in Odessa, Russia with the SWL
callsign RK-1136. In 1931 his family, like many other Greek families
in Russia, moved to Athens where Takis built a 4-valve transmitter
with which he was very active on 40 and 20 metre CW using the callsign
SV1AAA.

    I frequently operated his station myself and when I asked him why
he had chosen that particular callsign he gave me what proved to be a
truly prophetic answer. "It will be ages," he said, "before the Greek
State officially recognizes the very existence of radio amateurs and
begins to issue transmitting licences to them.  After that it might
take another 50 years for them to get to the three-letter series
beginning with SV1AAA."

    In actual fact this is what happened: legislation was enacted 40
years later and the callsign SV1AAA was officially allocated to Nikita
Venizelos after 54 years had elapsed!

    Although at the time there was no official recognition of amateur
radio in Greece, the existence and identity of the handful of 'under
cover' operators was known to the Head of the W/T section at the
Ministry of Posts & Telegraphs (Greek initials T.T.T.)  Stefanos
Eleftheriou who did more than anyone else to encourage and promote the
development of our hobby.  In fact, following a minor brush with the
police in 1937 (described by N2DOE later in this book) Eleftheriou
issued three licences 'for experimental research in connection with
the propagation of short waves' on the basis of earlier legislation
governing the use of wireless telegraphy which really had nothing to
do with amateur radio.  The recipients of these three licences were
Costas 'Bill' Tavaniotis SV1KE, Aghis Cazazis SV1CA and Nikos Katselis
SV1NK.  As there were no relevant regulations the choice of callsign
was left to the individual operators.  For instance, Tavaniotis ran
his own electrical and electronic business called KONSTAV ELECTRIC so
he decided to use "KE" as his callsign.

    As far as I know the following ten amateurs were active in the
Athens area in 1937:

          1. Takis Coumbias.....................SV1AAA
          2. 'Bill' Tavaniotis..................SV1KE (silent key)
          3. Polycarpos  Psomiadis..............SV1AZ (now N2DOE)
          4. Aghis Cazazis......................SV1CA (silent key)
          5. Nikos Katselis.....................SV1NK (silent key)
          6. George Zarifis...............SV1SP/SV6SP (now SV1AA)
          7. Nasos Coucoulis....................SV1SM (silent key)
          8. George Yiapapas....................SV1GY (now QRT)
          9. Menelaos Paidousis.................SV1MP
         10. Norman Joly........................SV1RX (now G3FNJ)


    In 1952 Costas Karayiannis who ran a big business called RADIO
KARAYIANNI published an amazingly comprehensive book entitled ELLINIKI
RADIOFONIA which means 'Greek Broadcasting'. It contained a vast
treasure of information on many subjects allied to broadcasting, and
there was a page entitled DAWN (1930-1940) which dealt with amateur
radio activity in Greece before World War II.  It confirmed most of
the names listed above as can be seen in the photo-copy of the
original Greek text, and it mentioned three others: George Gerardos
SV1AG, (silent key), S. Stefanou and Mikes Psalidas who was allocated
the callsign SV1AF 20 years later, though he, like many others had
come on the air after the end of the war with an unofficial callsign.

    Were all these operators who functioned strictly in accordance
with international regulations pirates?  In my view they were
certainly not pirates.  If the State was officially unaware of the
existence of amateur radio how could they apply for licences and be
issued with official callsigns?

    Later in this book N2DOE describes how a handful of amateurs had
prepared draft legislation in 1937 at the request of Stefanos
Eleftheriou of the Ministry but the outbreak of World War II in
September 1939 had prevented him from taking any action in this
connection.

    The island of Crete in southern Greece was first heard on the air
in 1938 when George Zarifis came on 40 metre CW using the callsign
SV6SP.  His transmitter consisted of a single metal 6L6 crystal
oscillator with an input of about 7 watts.  For reception he used an
American CASE broadcast receiver in which he had fitted a BFO. In a
very short period he had about 500 QSOs.

    Forty four years later some of the younger generation of operators
who had not heard of this early activity from Crete allocated the
prefix SV9 to the island.  Rather illogically they allocated SV8 to
all the other islands irrespective of their geographical position and
with yet another exception--SV5 for the twelve Dodecanese islands.

    General George Zarifis (retired) SV1AA as he is now, had started
playing with 'wireless' a long long time before he went to Crete.  In
1921 when he was in the 4th form at school he had bought two kits of
parts from France and put them together with the help of his
fellow-student George Grabinger.  The kit consisted of a bright
emitter triode in an oscillating circuit.  The heater supply was a 4
volt accumulator, and a dozen or so dry cells, with an earphone in
series, supplied the anode voltage.  The tuned circuit consisted of a
coil with a small pressure operated capacitor across it. A carbon
microphone with a dry cell in series was connected to two or three
turns of wire wound over the coil.  The assembled kits were tested
close to each other and they worked.  Later, when they had connected
random length wire antennas to the circuits the two schoolboys were
able to talk to each other across the 400 metres which separated their
homes.  These contacts quite definitely heralded the dawn of amateur
radio in Greece at about the same time as the 1921 Transatlantic tests
were taking place.

    On the 1st of September 1939 Hitler's armies invaded Poland.
Great Britain which had a treaty with Poland was compelled to declare
war on Germany two days later on the 3rd, followed by France.  Canada
and Australia declared war on Germany the next day.  All the radio
amateurs in Athens immediately dismantled their transmitters and
dispersed the components.

    So ended the first phase of amateur radio activity in Greece.



                            CHAPTER SIX

                 WORLD WAR II AND AFTER IN GREECE

    Socrates Coutroubis SV1AE described to me how his interest in
radio was aroused in 1935 when he was 13 years old. His father had
decided to buy a domestic radio receiver.

    "Of course in 1935 Athens had no broadcasting service," Socrates
said, "so the receiver had to be able to tune in to the short wave
broadcasting bands.  As we already had a Westinghouse refrigerator my
father decided we should try one of their receivers.  When I say 'try'
I must explain that it was the usual thing to ask a number of agents
to submit their latest models for comparison at one's home.  I
remember that together with the Westinghouse, we had an Atwater Kent,
Philco, RCA, Stromberg-Carlson and several sets of European
manufacture such as Philips, Blaupunkt, Saba etc.  We finally settled
for the German Saba because it was the prettiest and blended better
with our living room furniture!

    "There were very few stations to be found on the short waves.  But
I remember the Dutch station PCJ run by the Philips company in
Eindhoven.  The announcer was Edward Startz who spoke perfect English
and about a dozen other languages.  "This is the Happy Station,
broadcasting from the Netherlands" he would say cheerfully.

    "A couple of years after we had bought the radio we were returning
from an open air movie round about midnight when I noticed a book on
sale at a road-side kiosk. It was entitled THE RADIO AMATEUR'S
HANDBOOK published by the A.R.R.L. I had no idea what the initials
stood for.  The price was astronomical for my pocket but after a
little coercion I got my father to buy it for me.  When I began to
read it I discovered the existence of radio amateurs.  It was the 1939
edition and I found a circuit for a receiver which looked simple
enough for me to try.  It was described as a regenerative detector and
audio amplifier.

    "At that time the best place to buy components in Athens was at a
store called Radio Karayianni, but three others shops also stocked
valves (tubes) and components.  One was the Electron run by George
Spanos, who was the agent for the Dutch Philips company. Then there
was a shop in a basement next door, Konstav Electric, owned by 'Bill'
Tavaniotis SV1KE.  A wide range of components were also stocked by the
Raytheon agent, Nick Katselis SV1NK.

    "I obtained some plug-in forms and wound the coils carefully
according to the instructions but unfortunately the receiver didn't
work very well, if at all. When I asked a few friends they suggested I
should shorten the very long wires I had used between the components,
and sure enough I had the greatest thrill of my life when for the
first time I heard Rome on short waves on my very own home-made
receiver.  Outstanding stations in the broadcast band in those days
were Trieste in northern Italy, Katowice in Poland, Breslau in Germany
and Toulouse in south-west France.

    "Although I had read about the activities of radio amateurs in the
Handbook I had not yet heard any of the half dozen or so stations that
were already operating on CW and AM telephony in the Athens area.

    "My father used to buy the periodical LONDON CALLING which
contained the overseas programmes of the B.B.C. as well as the
programmes of the principal European broadcasting stations.  This
publication also carried advertisements and it was there that I first
saw an illustration of the Hammarlund Super Pro and realised that
there were receivers specially designed for the reception of short
waves.

    "But during the German/Italian occupation of Greece between 1941
and 1944 my little home-made receiver played a vital role in enabling
us to listen (secretly) to the B.B.C. broadcasts because the
authorities had sealed all radios to the broadcast (medium wave) band
and to the frequency of Radio Athens.  Most people devised ingenuous
methods of listening to stations other than Athens.

    "After the end of the war a friend of mine who returned to Athens
from Cairo brought me the 1945 edition of the A.R.R.L.Handbook, which
is still on the shelf as you can see."

    Socrates explained that in 1945 there was complete political
upheaval in Greece, owing to the events that had taken place during
the foreign occupation, so the General Election of that year was
carried out under the supervision of foreign observers from the
U.S.A., the United Kingdom & France. The Russians did not send a
mission.

    "Owing to my knowledge of English I was employed by the American
mission to act as interpreter.  One day when I was off duty I was
taken by a friend to a signals unit where there were many pieces of
equipment which had been 'liberated', and I was able to buy a BC 342
receiver.  Later when Harry Barnett SV1WE who was in the Press
Department of the British Embassy returned to England I bought his
Hallicrafter SX28.

    "It was at Harry's house in Kolonaki that I had my first taste of
amateur radio in action.  He had a National HRO for reception and he
had constructed a 50-watt transmitter using surplus components which
were in plentiful supply at that time.

    "Another friend of mine, Jim Liverios, was employed at the Civil
Aviation transmitter site on a hill south of Nea Smyrni.  The American
Mission had set up their short wave transmitters on the same site and
later Interpol installed their own equipment as well.  Liverios was
always on night shift because he attended the University during the
day. I still don't know how he ever managed to get any sleep. When
things were quiet he would 'borrow' a 5 Kw transmitter and tune it in
the 20 metre band. Using a callsign of his own choice (probably a
different one every night) he would have contacts with the whole
world.  On his invitation I went there at midnight one night and
stayed until the morning.  I remember we had QSOs with Cuba, Chile,
New Zealand and Australia."


              THE AFFAIR OF THE PIRAEUS POLICE.

    In 1947, there was a war in northern Greece which some people
called a civil war and others a war against the guerrillas, depending
on whose side they were on.  Suddenly one morning all the Athens
newspapers came out with some amazing headlines:

"THE WIRELESS TRANSMITTERS OF THE COMMUNISTS HAVE BEEN SEIZED IN
ATHENS"

"WIRELESS TRANSMITTERS FOUND IN COMMUNIST HANDS"

"HOW THE FIVE TRANSMITTERS OF THE COMMUNISTS WERE DISCOVERED"

"THE SIX INSTALLATIONS SEIZED BY THE POLICE"

    Two of the newspapers printed the identical photograph (included
in the montage) with the following caption, 'The Communist
transmitters seized by the Piraeus police'.  This was a photograph of
the shack of Mikes Psalidas SV1AF. At the top right one can see a
2-inch home-made monitor oscilloscope, which the newspapers described
as a 'powerful radar'!

    "During the last three days," wrote one newspaper, "the police in
Piraeus have been investigating a very serious case implicating
leading cadres of the Communist party."  Of course, it was nothing of
the sort.  The equipment they had seized belonged to five radio
amateurs, George Gerardos SV1AG, Mikes Psalidas SV1AF, Nasos Coucoulis
SV1AC, Aghis Cazazis SV1CA and Sotiris Stefanou who didn't have a
callsign yet.  In fact Mikes Psalidas was not even at home at the time
of the police raid, as he was in a military camp in the outskirts of
Athens, doing his compulsory military service.  The newspapers
described in detail what had been found.  "At the house of Mikes
Psalidas, who is a student at the Athens Polytechnic, the police found
wireless telegraphy receiving equipment (a National HRO), wireless
telephony equipment in full working order, that is, two transmitting
microphones, a step-down transformer and various other items."

    The same newspaper went on "Unfortunately, at the house of Aghis
Cazazis, at 25 Tenedou street, the search was inconclusive because a
certain person, well known to the police, and whose arrest is
imminent, removed a high power transmitter just before the police
arrived and disappeared with it."

    Another newspaper referred to "telegrams in code", received from
abroad and from the secret headquarters of the Communists, "which are
now being deciphered by a special department".  These were SV1AG's
little collection of QSL cards.

    Stefanos Eleftheriou of the Ministry immediately took up the
matter. Firstly, he pointed out to the Piraeus police that Athens did
not come under their jurisdiction, and they had no right to arrest
anybody there without a warrant.  Secondly, all the five radio
amateurs they had arrested were known for their nationalistic
political convictions, particularly Psalidas whose father was a senior
officer of the Royal Hellenic airforce.

    Before the 'suspects' were released and their confiscated
equipment returned to them, they were warned not to speak to newspaper
reporters at the risk of getting a kick up their backsides.  This was
to prevent the public from learning how ludicrous had been the
accusations, and how completely unjustified the arrests had been.  But
one newspaper came out the following day with a banner headline "THE
OWNERS OF THE WIRELESS AND RADAR EQUIPMENT ALL TURNED OUT TO BE
STAUNCH ROYALISTS!" This paper sent a reporter to interview SV1AC.
They wrote, "In reply to a question from our reporter, Mr Coucoulis
said that when the police realised the foolishness of their action,
they issued a summons against him under Law 4749, which has absolutely
nothing to do with amateur radio."

    "During the ten years following the end of World War II there were
about 15 to 20 very active amateurs in the Athens area, all using
callsigns of their own choice because no government legislation had
yet been enacted.  Most of these operators subsequently obtained
licences and had to change to the official series.  I remember two YLs
who were very popular in Europe and the U.S.A.  because they spoke
several languages fluently, but they never re-appeared when licences
began to be issued."

   Since 1945 the U.S. and British signals units were authorised by
the Greek Ministry of Communications to issue calls to military and
diplomatic personnel in the series SV0WA in the case of American staff
and SV0AA for the British.

    Socrates continued: "I heard that the Americans had formed a club
called 'Attica Amateur Radio Club' in Kifissia, a suburb to the north
of Athens, and in due course I was able to become a member."

    "In 1954," Socrates continued, "George Zarifis (currently SV1AA)
who was a regular army officer in the Legal Branch approached Mr
Nicolis who was Director of the Wireless Division at the Ministry of
Communications and asked him 'Since you have authorised the Americans
and the British to issue licences to their personnel, why do you not
grant the same facility to us Greek amateurs?'.  To which Nicolis had
replied 'There is no law of the land recognising the very existence of
radio amateurs so how can I issue licences to you?'.

    "It was then that we decided to form an association whose
principal objective would be the enactment of legislation recognising
officially the existence of radio amateurs in Greece.  As a recognised
body we would then be able to go back to Nicolis and get him to pursue
the matter.

    "That was how, late in 1957, we formed the Radio Amateur
Association of Greece, R.A.A.G., Greek initials E.E.R.

    "At the same time, after considerable effort, we got the Ministry
to issue 7 licences based on the Wireless Telegraphy Act of 1930 (No
4797) and the regulations relating to Law 1049 of 1949, as well as a
document dated July 8th 1957 issued by the radio division of the
Central Intelligence service (Greek initials K.Y.P.-R).  This order
authorised the installation of a 50 watt transmitter to an applicant
under certain strict limitations, one of which was that the station
could only be operated from 06.00 to 08.00 hours and from 13.00 to
midnight.  The seven lucky recipients are shown in the accompanying
photograph.

        Akis Lianos SV1AD, Socrates Coutroubis SV1AE, Nasos Coucoulis
SV1AC (silent key), George Zarifis SV1AA, Mikes Psalidas SV1AF, George
Vernardakis SV1AB and George Gerardos SV1AG (silent key).

  "At that time (1958) my AM station consisted of a Hammarlund SP600
receiver and a home-built transmitter using an Italian Geloso
VFO-exciter driving a pair of 6146s in the final, with anode and
screen modulation by a pair of 807s in class AB2. I had also assembled
a double conversion receiver using a Geloso front end.  This was
typical of the equipment used in Greece and Italy in the early 1960s.

    "Licences continued to be issued until 1967 when the Junta
Colonels Papadopoulos and Patakos established the military
dictatorship.  We were all ordered to seal our equipment and obtain
written confirmation from the nearest Police authority that the
disablement had been carried out.

    "Six months later, in December of 1967 we started getting our
licences back.  Most of us believed that because some of the younger
officers in the military government had received training at the
Pentagon in the U.S.A. they convinced their superiors that it was
better for the genuine amateurs to be allowed to operate their
equipment under close supervision by the military and under new
regulations, rather than have under cover operators starting up all
over again.

    "George Gerardos SV1AG had a friend Oresti Yiaka who was involved
in government telecommunications and it was through him that draft
legislation for the issue of amateur licences was instigated, but not
for the first time. Unsuccessful attempts had been made before the war.

    "In 1965 when George Papandreou was Prime Minister, on the very
day when the Draft Bill was going to be put before Parliament the
government resigned and another 10 years went by.  When legislation
was finally published in the Government Gazette in 1972, owing to the
prevailing political situation (military dictatorship) it had serious
limitations imposed by some Ministries which had to look after their
own interests, especially the Ministry of National Defence. But George
Gerardos, SV1AG, who had been closely involved, decided that it would
be better to overlook certain details which may seem strange to us at
the present time--details which could be rectified at a later date,
provided the law was finally on the Statute book.  For instance, I
refer to the very restricted frequencies we were allocated in the
80-metre band, 3.500 to 3.600 MHz. Obviously when we began
transmitting SSB telephony below 3.600 we were greeted with angry
protestations from the CW operators there.  And what was worse, the
voices of Greek amateurs were not heard in the DX portion of the phone
allocation from 3.750 to 3.800 MHz.

    "Unfortunately, there was another and more serious snag. The last
paragraph of the Law said that it would come into force only after
publication in the Government Gazette of regulations clarifying
certain details and procedures.  So we were back to square one.

    "But this did not prevent the General Staff of the military
dictatorship from continuing to issue new licences under the special
restrictions they had laid down.  When the dictatorship came to an end
the new government finally published Regulation 271 on April 30th
1976, which made the 1972 law fully operative."

    During the period of the military dictatorship a break-away club
was formed by Dinos Psiloyiannis SV1DB who added the word 'national'
to its name making the Greek initials E.E.E.R.  His motives were
rather dubious, one of them being that he objected to a regulation
which required an applicant for a licence to produce a declaration
signed by the President and the Secretary of Radio Amateur Association
of Greece.  Psiloyiannis, who had contacts with the military
authorities (both his father and brother were officers) declared "I
will form my own association and issue declarations myself."  By this
manoeuvre he obtained licences for quite a few newcomers, but after a
year or two his club ceased to function and most if not all of its
members joined the R.A.A.G.

    An amendment of Law 1244 of 1972 published in the Government
Gazette No.114 dated June 3rd 1988 finally abolished the requirement
of the controversial declaration, as well as the rule which said that
before anyone could apply for a licence they had to join an officially
recognised association or club.



                           CHAPTER SEVEN

                        PIONEERS IN GREECE

1.  General George Zarifis (retired) SV1AA.

    As recorded in detail in chapter 5, George was undoubtedly the
first Greek amateur to have two-way contacts using radio telephony,
way back in 1921.  He was also the first amateur to operate from the
island of Crete in 1938.


2.  Dr Costas Fimerelis SV1DH. (Transequatorial propagation).

    On October 9th 1988 at 23.10 GMT a new world distance record was
established on the 50 MHz band by the Greek experimental station SZ2DH
operated by Costas Fimerelis SV1DH and a station in Tokyo, when it was
proved that the signals had travelled a distance of 30,650 over the
South American continent.  This is 15,000 kilometres more than the
short path between the two stations, over which there was absolutely
no propagation at that moment in time.

    A simple 5 element Yagi and a power of 100 watts was used at
SZ2DH.  The contact was on CW but the signals were so strong that it
might well have been on SSB.  It is estimated that 8 hops were needed
to cover this record distance.

    Most people know by now that SV1DH was one of the principal
stations involved in the very successful Transequatorial propagation
tests which took place during the 21st sunspot cycle between 1977 and
1983. Costas gave me a simplified explanation of the phenomenon first
noticed by Ray Cracknell ZE2JV and Roland Whiting 5B4WR way back in
September 1957, namely that VHF signals can travel great distances
across the equator (5,000 to 8,000 kilometres) during the years of
high sunspot activity.

    Costas said that usually stations located approximately the same
distance north and south of the magnetic (not geographic) equator can
contact each other shortly after sunset at both locations.  The first
such QSO took place on the 10th April 1978 between ZE2JV and 5B4WR.
Two days later ZE2JV contacted George Vernardakis SV1AB and this
contact was followed a few days later with QSOs with SV1DH and SV1CS.
(Fuller details of these contacts are given later in this book in the
interview with SV1AB).

    In October 1976 there was a rumour that 145 MHz signals had been
heard directly between Argentina and Venezuela.  With the imminent
beginning of sunspot cycle 21 many amateurs in the northern and
southern hemispheres began organizing tests on 50,144,220 and 432 MHz.
Within less than a year successful 2-way contact was established
between Argentina and Venezuela on 144 MHz.

   Greece is favourably placed for TEP to countries in Africa where
there is considerable amateur radio activity, like Zimbabwe and the
Union of South Africa.  So towards the end of 1977 SV1AB and SV1DH
began looking for colleagues in suitable geographic locations with the
appropriate equipment and the time and inclination to engage in tests
which could go on for months and months on end.  Very soon the
following stations agreed to participate in the tests.  The northern
group included SV1AB, SV1DH, 5B4WR and 5B4AZ.  In the southern
hemisphere participants were ZE2JV (now G2AHU), ZS6PW, ZS6DN, ZS6LN
and ZS3B.

    After 4 months of daily test schedules, early in 1978, successful
contacts took place on 144 MHz, some of which constituted world
distance records for that time, as can be seen in the accompanying
table.  Amateurs in Malta, Italy, France and Spain soon began to
participate in the tests, as well as amateurs in other areas of South
Africa.

    It can be seen from the world map that the magnetic dip (shown as
a heavy line) is very different to the geographic equator.  The QTH of
SV1AB is in a suburb 10 kilometres north of SV1DH's so George's
contacts with the stations in Africa always had that edge on them.

    In South Africa Dave Larson ZS6DN had set up a beacon which was
first heard in Athens by SV1AB in February 1979. Within a few days
ZS6DN had QSOs with SV1DH and SV1AB.  The latter contact was a world
distance record via the F-regions of the ionosphere because of the
extra distance involved owing to the locations of the two Greek
stations, as mentioned in the previous paragraph.

    For anyone who may be interested very comprehensive