The Project Gutenberg eBook of Thuvia, maid of Mars
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Thuvia, maid of Mars

Author: Edgar Rice Burroughs


        
Release date: July 1, 1993 [eBook #72]
                Most recently updated: May 26, 2022

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/72

Credits: Judith Boss and Charles Keller


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THUVIA, MAID OF MARS ***




Thuvia, Maid of Mars

by Edgar Rice Burroughs


Contents

 I. CARTHORIS AND THUVIA
 II. SLAVERY
 III. TREACHERY
 IV. A GREEN MAN’S CAPTIVE
 V. THE FAIR RACE
 VI. THE JEDDAK OF LOTHAR
 VII. THE PHANTOM BOWMEN
 VIII. THE HALL OF DOOM
 IX. THE BATTLE IN THE PLAIN
 X. KAR KOMAK, THE BOWMAN
 XI. GREEN MEN AND WHITE APES
 XII. TO SAVE DUSAR
 XIII. TURJUN, THE PANTHAN
 XIV. KULAN TITH’S SACRIFICE
 A GLOSSARY OF NAMES AND TERMS USED IN THE MARTIAN BOOKS




THUVIA, MAID OF MARS




CHAPTER I.
CARTHORIS AND THUVIA


Upon a massive bench of polished ersite beneath the gorgeous blooms of
a giant pimalia a woman sat. Her shapely, sandalled foot tapped
impatiently upon the jewel-strewn walk that wound beneath the stately
sorapus trees across the scarlet sward of the royal gardens of Thuvan
Dihn, Jeddak of Ptarth, as a dark-haired, red-skinned warrior bent low
toward her, whispering heated words close to her ear.

“Ah, Thuvia of Ptarth,” he cried, “you are cold even before the fiery
blasts of my consuming love! No harder than your heart, nor colder is
the hard, cold ersite of this thrice happy bench which supports your
divine and fadeless form! Tell me, O Thuvia of Ptarth, that I may still
hope—that though you do not love me now, yet some day, some day, my
princess, I—”

The girl sprang to her feet with an exclamation of surprise and
displeasure. Her queenly head was poised haughtily upon her smooth red
shoulders. Her dark eyes looked angrily into those of the man.

“You forget yourself, and the customs of Barsoom, Astok,” she said. “I
have given you no right thus to address the daughter of Thuvan Dihn,
nor have you won such a right.”

The man reached suddenly forth and grasped her by the arm.

“You shall be my princess!” he cried. “By the breast of Issus, thou
shalt, nor shall any other come between Astok, Prince of Dusar, and his
heart’s desire. Tell me that there is another, and I shall cut out his
foul heart and fling it to the wild calots of the dead sea-bottoms!”

At touch of the man’s hand upon her flesh the girl went pallid beneath
her coppery skin, for the persons of the royal women of the courts of
Mars are held but little less than sacred. The act of Astok, Prince of
Dusar, was profanation. There was no terror in the eyes of Thuvia of
Ptarth—only horror for the thing the man had done and for its possible
consequences.

“Release me.” Her voice was level—frigid.

The man muttered incoherently and drew her roughly toward him.

“Release me!” she repeated sharply, “or I call the guard, and the
Prince of Dusar knows what that will mean.”

Quickly he threw his right arm about her shoulders and strove to draw
her face to his lips. With a little cry she struck him full in the
mouth with the massive bracelets that circled her free arm.

“Calot!” she exclaimed, and then: “The guard! The guard! Hasten in
protection of the Princess of Ptarth!”

In answer to her call a dozen guardsmen came racing across the scarlet
sward, their gleaming long-swords naked in the sun, the metal of their
accoutrements clanking against that of their leathern harness, and in
their throats hoarse shouts of rage at the sight which met their eyes.

But before they had passed half across the royal garden to where Astok
of Dusar still held the struggling girl in his grasp, another figure
sprang from a cluster of dense foliage that half hid a golden fountain
close at hand. A tall, straight youth he was, with black hair and keen
grey eyes; broad of shoulder and narrow of hip; a clean-limbed fighting
man. His skin was but faintly tinged with the copper colour that marks
the red men of Mars from the other races of the dying planet—he was
like them, and yet there was a subtle difference greater even than that
which lay in his lighter skin and his grey eyes.

There was a difference, too, in his movements. He came on in great
leaps that carried him so swiftly over the ground that the speed of the
guardsmen was as nothing by comparison.

Astok still clutched Thuvia’s wrist as the young warrior confronted
him. The new-comer wasted no time and he spoke but a single word.

“Calot!” he snapped, and then his clenched fist landed beneath the
other’s chin, lifting him high into the air and depositing him in a
crumpled heap within the centre of the pimalia bush beside the ersite
bench.

Her champion turned toward the girl. “Kaor, Thuvia of Ptarth!” he
cried. “It seems that fate timed my visit well.”

“Kaor, Carthoris of Helium!” the princess returned the young man’s
greeting, “and what less could one expect of the son of such a sire?”

He bowed his acknowledgment of the compliment to his father, John
Carter, Warlord of Mars. And then the guardsmen, panting from their
charge, came up just as the Prince of Dusar, bleeding at the mouth, and
with drawn sword, crawled from the entanglement of the pimalia.

Astok would have leaped to mortal combat with the son of Dejah Thoris,
but the guardsmen pressed about him, preventing, though it was clearly
evident that naught would have better pleased Carthoris of Helium.

“But say the word, Thuvia of Ptarth,” he begged, “and naught will give
me greater pleasure than meting to this fellow the punishment he has
earned.”

“It cannot be, Carthoris,” she replied. “Even though he has forfeited
all claim upon my consideration, yet is he the guest of the jeddak, my
father, and to him alone may he account for the unpardonable act he has
committed.”

“As you say, Thuvia,” replied the Heliumite. “But afterward he shall
account to Carthoris, Prince of Helium, for this affront to the
daughter of my father’s friend.” As he spoke, though, there burned in
his eyes a fire that proclaimed a nearer, dearer cause for his
championship of this glorious daughter of Barsoom.

The maid’s cheek darkened beneath the satin of her transparent skin,
and the eyes of Astok, Prince of Dusar, darkened, too, as he read that
which passed unspoken between the two in the royal gardens of the
jeddak.

“And thou to me,” he snapped at Carthoris, answering the young man’s
challenge.

The guard still surrounded Astok. It was a difficult position for the
young officer who commanded it. His prisoner was the son of a mighty
jeddak; he was the guest of Thuvan Dihn—until but now an honoured guest
upon whom every royal dignity had been showered. To arrest him forcibly
could mean naught else than war, and yet he had done that which in the
eyes of the Ptarth warrior merited death.

The young man hesitated. He looked toward his princess. She, too,
guessed all that hung upon the action of the coming moment. For many
years Dusar and Ptarth had been at peace with each other. Their great
merchant ships plied back and forth between the larger cities of the
two nations. Even now, far above the gold-shot scarlet dome of the
jeddak’s palace, she could see the huge bulk of a giant freighter
taking its majestic way through the thin Barsoomian air toward the west
and Dusar.

By a word she might plunge these two mighty nations into a bloody
conflict that would drain them of their bravest blood and their
incalculable riches, leaving them all helpless against the inroads of
their envious and less powerful neighbors, and at last a prey to the
savage green hordes of the dead sea-bottoms.

No sense of fear influenced her decision, for fear is seldom known to
the children of Mars. It was rather a sense of the responsibility that
she, the daughter of their jeddak, felt for the welfare of her father’s
people.

“I called you, Padwar,” she said to the lieutenant of the guard, “to
protect the person of your princess, and to keep the peace that must
not be violated within the royal gardens of the jeddak. That is all.
You will escort me to the palace, and the Prince of Helium will
accompany me.”

Without another glance in the direction of Astok she turned, and taking
Carthoris’ proffered hand, moved slowly toward the massive marble pile
that housed the ruler of Ptarth and his glittering court. On either
side marched a file of guardsmen. Thus Thuvia of Ptarth found a way out
of a dilemma, escaping the necessity of placing her father’s royal
guest under forcible restraint, and at the same time separating the two
princes, who otherwise would have been at each other’s throat the
moment she and the guard had departed.

Beside the pimalia stood Astok, his dark eyes narrowed to mere slits of
hate beneath his lowering brows as he watched the retreating forms of
the woman who had aroused the fiercest passions of his nature and the
man whom he now believed to be the one who stood between his love and
its consummation.

As they disappeared within the structure Astok shrugged his shoulders,
and with a murmured oath crossed the gardens toward another wing of the
building where he and his retinue were housed.

That night he took formal leave of Thuvan Dihn, and though no mention
was made of the happening within the garden, it was plain to see
through the cold mask of the jeddak’s courtesy that only the customs of
royal hospitality restrained him from voicing the contempt he felt for
the Prince of Dusar.

Carthoris was not present at the leave-taking, nor was Thuvia. The
ceremony was as stiff and formal as court etiquette could make it, and
when the last of the Dusarians clambered over the rail of the
battleship that had brought them upon this fateful visit to the court
of Ptarth, and the mighty engine of destruction had risen slowly from
the ways of the landing stage, a note of relief was apparent in the
voice of Thuvan Dihn as he turned to one of his officers with a word of
comment upon a subject foreign to that which had been uppermost in the
minds of all for hours.

But, after all, was it so foreign?

“Inform Prince Sovan,” he directed, “that it is our wish that the fleet
which departed for Kaol this morning be recalled to cruise to the west
of Ptarth.”

As the warship, bearing Astok back to the court of his father, turned
toward the west, Thuvia of Ptarth, sitting upon the same bench where
the Prince of Dusar had affronted her, watched the twinkling lights of
the craft growing smaller in the distance. Beside her, in the brilliant
light of the nearer moon, sat Carthoris. His eyes were not upon the dim
bulk of the battleship, but on the profile of the girl’s upturned face.

“Thuvia,” he whispered.

The girl turned her eyes toward his. His hand stole out to find hers,
but she drew her own gently away.

“Thuvia of Ptarth, I love you!” cried the young warrior. “Tell me that
it does not offend.”

She shook her head sadly. “The love of Carthoris of Helium,” she said
simply, “could be naught but an honour to any woman; but you must not
speak, my friend, of bestowing upon me that which I may not
reciprocate.”

The young man got slowly to his feet. His eyes were wide in
astonishment. It never had occurred to the Prince of Helium that Thuvia
of Ptarth might love another.

“But at Kadabra!” he exclaimed. “And later here at your father’s court,
what did you do, Thuvia of Ptarth, that might have warned me that you
could not return my love?”

“And what did I do, Carthoris of Helium,” she returned, “that might
lead you to believe that I _did_ return it?”

He paused in thought, and then shook his head. “Nothing, Thuvia, that
is true; yet I could have sworn you loved me. Indeed, you well knew how
near to worship has been my love for you.”

“And how might I know it, Carthoris?” she asked innocently. “Did you
ever tell me as much? Ever before have words of love for me fallen from
your lips?”

“But you _must_ have known it!” he exclaimed. “I am like my
father—witless in matters of the heart, and of a poor way with women;
yet the jewels that strew these royal garden paths—the trees, the
flowers, the sward—all must have read the love that has filled my heart
since first my eyes were made new by imaging your perfect face and
form; so how could you alone have been blind to it?”

“Do the maids of Helium pay court to their men?” asked Thuvia.

“You are playing with me!” exclaimed Carthoris. “Say that you are but
playing, and that after all you love me, Thuvia!”

“I cannot tell you that, Carthoris, for I am promised to another.”

Her tone was level, but was there not within it the hint of an infinite
depth of sadness? Who may say?

“Promised to another?” Carthoris scarcely breathed the words. His face
went almost white, and then his head came up as befitted him in whose
veins flowed the blood of the overlord of a world.

“Carthoris of Helium wishes you every happiness with the man of your
choice,” he said. “With—” and then he hesitated, waiting for her to
fill in the name.

“Kulan Tith, Jeddak of Kaol,” she replied. “My father’s friend and
Ptarth’s most puissant ally.”

The young man looked at her intently for a moment before he spoke
again.

“You love him, Thuvia of Ptarth?” he asked.

“I am promised to him,” she replied simply.

He did not press her. “He is of Barsoom’s noblest blood and mightiest
fighters,” mused Carthoris. “My father’s friend and mine—would that it
might have been another!” he muttered almost savagely. What the girl
thought was hidden by the mask of her expression, which was tinged only
by a little shadow of sadness that might have been for Carthoris,
herself, or for them both.

Carthoris of Helium did not ask, though he noted it, for his loyalty to
Kulan Tith was the loyalty of the blood of John Carter of Virginia for
a friend, greater than which could be no loyalty.

He raised a jewel-encrusted bit of the girl’s magnificent trappings to
his lips.

“To the honour and happiness of Kulan Tith and the priceless jewel that
has been bestowed upon him,” he said, and though his voice was husky
there was the true ring of sincerity in it. “I told you that I loved
you, Thuvia, before I knew that you were promised to another. I may not
tell you it again, but I am glad that you know it, for there is no
dishonour in it either to you or to Kulan Tith or to myself. My love is
such that it may embrace as well Kulan Tith—if you love him.” There was
almost a question in the statement.

“I am promised to him,” she replied.

Carthoris backed slowly away. He laid one hand upon his heart, the
other upon the pommel of his long-sword.

“These are yours—always,” he said. A moment later he had entered the
palace, and was gone from the girl’s sight.

Had he returned at once he would have found her prone upon the ersite
bench, her face buried in her arms. Was she weeping? There was none to
see.

Carthoris of Helium had come all unannounced to the court of his
father’s friend that day. He had come alone in a small flier, sure of
the same welcome that always awaited him at Ptarth. As there had been
no formality in his coming there was no need of formality in his going.

To Thuvan Dihn he explained that he had been but testing an invention
of his own with which his flier was equipped—a clever improvement of
the ordinary Martian air compass, which, when set for a certain
destination, will remain constantly fixed thereon, making it only
necessary to keep a vessel’s prow always in the direction of the
compass needle to reach any given point upon Barsoom by the shortest
route.

Carthoris’ improvement upon this consisted of an auxiliary device which
steered the craft mechanically in the direction of the compass, and
upon arrival directly over the point for which the compass was set,
brought the craft to a standstill and lowered it, also automatically,
to the ground.

“You readily discern the advantages of this invention,” he was saying
to Thuvan Dihn, who had accompanied him to the landing stage upon the
palace roof to inspect the compass and bid his young friend farewell.

A dozen officers of the court with several body servants were grouped
behind the jeddak and his guest, eager listeners to the conversation—so
eager on the part of one of the servants that he was twice rebuked by a
noble for his forwardness in pushing himself ahead of his betters to
view the intricate mechanism of the wonderful “controlling destination
compass,” as the thing was called.

“For example,” continued Carthoris, “I have an all-night trip before
me, as to-night. I set the pointer here upon the right-hand dial which
represents the eastern hemisphere of Barsoom, so that the point rests
upon the exact latitude and longitude of Helium. Then I start the
engine, roll up in my sleeping silks and furs, and with lights burning,
race through the air toward Helium, confident that at the appointed
hour I shall drop gently toward the landing stage upon my own palace,
whether I am still asleep or no.”

“Provided,” suggested Thuvan Dihn, “you do not chance to collide with
some other night wanderer in the meanwhile.”

Carthoris smiled. “No danger of that,” he replied. “See here,” and he
indicated a device at the right of the destination compass. “This is my
‘obstruction evader,’ as I call it. This visible device is the switch
which throws the mechanism on or off. The instrument itself is below
deck, geared both to the steering apparatus and the control levers.

“It is quite simple, being nothing more than a radium generator
diffusing radio-activity in all directions to a distance of a hundred
yards or so from the flier. Should this enveloping force be interrupted
in any direction a delicate instrument immediately apprehends the
irregularity, at the same time imparting an impulse to a magnetic
device which in turn actuates the steering mechanism, diverting the bow
of the flier away from the obstacle until the craft’s radio-activity
sphere is no longer in contact with the obstruction, then she falls
once more into her normal course. Should the disturbance approach from
the rear, as in case of a faster-moving craft overhauling me, the
mechanism actuates the speed control as well as the steering gear, and
the flier shoots ahead and either up or down, as the oncoming vessel is
upon a lower or higher plane than herself.

“In aggravated cases, that is when the obstructions are many, or of
such a nature as to deflect the bow more than forty-five degrees in any
direction, or when the craft has reached its destination and dropped to
within a hundred yards of the ground, the mechanism brings her to a
full stop, at the same time sounding a loud alarm which will instantly
awaken the pilot. You see I have anticipated almost every contingency.”

Thuvan Dihn smiled his appreciation of the marvellous device. The
forward servant pushed almost to the flier’s side. His eyes were
narrowed to slits.

“All but one,” he said.

The nobles looked at him in astonishment, and one of them grasped the
fellow none too gently by the shoulder to push him back to his proper
place. Carthoris raised his hand.

“Wait,” he urged. “Let us hear what the man has to say—no creation of
mortal mind is perfect. Perchance he has detected a weakness that it
will be well to know at once. Come, my good fellow, and what may be the
one contingency I have overlooked?”

As he spoke Carthoris observed the servant closely for the first time.
He saw a man of giant stature and handsome, as are all those of the
race of Martian red men; but the fellow’s lips were thin and cruel, and
across one cheek was the faint, white line of a sword-cut from the
right temple to the corner of the mouth.

“Come,” urged the Prince of Helium. “Speak!”

The man hesitated. It was evident that he regretted the temerity that
had made him the centre of interested observation. But at last, seeing
no alternative, he spoke.

“It might be tampered with,” he said, “by an enemy.”

Carthoris drew a small key from his leathern pocket-pouch.

“Look at this,” he said, handing it to the man. “If you know aught of
locks, you will know that the mechanism which this unlooses is beyond
the cunning of a picker of locks. It guards the vitals of the
instrument from crafty tampering. Without it an enemy must half wreck
the device to reach its heart, leaving his handiwork apparent to the
most casual observer.”

The servant took the key, glanced at it shrewdly, and then as he made
to return it to Carthoris dropped it upon the marble flagging. Turning
to look for it he planted the sole of his sandal full upon the
glittering object. For an instant he bore all his weight upon the foot
that covered the key, then he stepped back and with an exclamation as
of pleasure that he had found it, stooped, recovered it, and returned
it to the Heliumite. Then he dropped back to his station behind the
nobles and was forgotten.

A moment later Carthoris had made his adieux to Thuvan Dihn and his
nobles, and with lights twinkling had risen into the star-shot void of
the Martian night.




CHAPTER II.
SLAVERY


As the ruler of Ptarth, followed by his courtiers, descended from the
landing stage above the palace, the servants dropped into their places
in the rear of their royal or noble masters, and behind the others one
lingered to the last. Then quickly stooping he snatched the sandal from
his right foot, slipping it into his pocket-pouch.

When the party had come to the lower levels, and the jeddak had
dispersed them by a sign, none noticed that the forward fellow who had
drawn so much attention to himself before the Prince of Helium
departed, was no longer among the other servants.

To whose retinue he had been attached none had thought to inquire, for
the followers of a Martian noble are many, coming and going at the whim
of their master, so that a new face is scarcely ever questioned, as the
fact that a man has passed within the palace walls is considered proof
positive that his loyalty to the jeddak is beyond question, so rigid is
the examination of each who seeks service with the nobles of the court.

A good rule that, and only relaxed by courtesy in favour of the retinue
of visiting royalty from a friendly foreign power.

It was late in the morning of the next day that a giant serving man in
the harness of the house of a great Ptarth noble passed out into the
city from the palace gates. Along one broad avenue and then another he
strode briskly until he had passed beyond the district of the nobles
and had come to the place of shops. Here he sought a pretentious
building that rose spire-like toward the heavens, its outer walls
elaborately wrought with delicate carvings and intricate mosaics.

It was the Palace of Peace in which were housed the representatives of
the foreign powers, or rather in which were located their embassies;
for the ministers themselves dwelt in gorgeous palaces within the
district occupied by the nobles.

Here the man sought the embassy of Dusar. A clerk arose questioningly
as he entered, and at his request to have a word with the minister
asked his credentials. The visitor slipped a plain metal armlet from
above his elbow, and pointing to an inscription upon its inner surface,
whispered a word or two to the clerk.

The latter’s eyes went wide, and his attitude turned at once to one of
deference. He bowed the stranger to a seat, and hastened to an inner
room with the armlet in his hand. A moment later he reappeared and
conducted the caller into the presence of the minister.

For a long time the two were closeted together, and when at last the
giant serving man emerged from the inner office his expression was cast
in a smile of sinister satisfaction. From the Palace of Peace he
hurried directly to the palace of the Dusarian minister.

That night two swift fliers left the same palace top. One sped its
rapid course toward Helium; the other—

Thuvia of Ptarth strolled in the gardens of her father’s palace, as was
her nightly custom before retiring. Her silks and furs were drawn about
her, for the air of Mars is chill after the sun has taken his quick
plunge beneath the planet’s western verge.

The girl’s thoughts wandered from her impending nuptials, that would
make her empress of Kaol, to the person of the trim young Heliumite who
had laid his heart at her feet the preceding day.

Whether it was pity or regret that saddened her expression as she gazed
toward the southern heavens where she had watched the lights of his
flier disappear the previous night, it would be difficult to say.

So, too, is it impossible to conjecture just what her emotions may have
been as she discerned the lights of a flier speeding rapidly out of the
distance from that very direction, as though impelled toward her garden
by the very intensity of the princess’ thoughts.

She saw it circle lower above the palace until she was positive that it
but hovered in preparation for a landing.

Presently the powerful rays of its searchlight shot downward from the
bow. They fell upon the landing stage for a brief instant, revealing
the figures of the Ptarthian guard, picking into brilliant points of
fire the gems upon their gorgeous harnesses.

Then the blazing eye swept onward across the burnished domes and
graceful minarets, down into court and park and garden to pause at last
upon the ersite bench and the girl standing there beside it, her face
upturned full toward the flier.

For but an instant the searchlight halted upon Thuvia of Ptarth, then
it was extinguished as suddenly as it had come to life. The flier
passed on above her to disappear beyond a grove of lofty skeel trees
that grew within the palace grounds.

The girl stood for some time as it had left her, except that her head
was bent and her eyes downcast in thought.

Who but Carthoris could it have been? She tried to feel anger that he
should have returned thus, spying upon her; but she found it difficult
to be angry with the young prince of Helium.

What mad caprice could have induced him so to transgress the etiquette
of nations? For lesser things great powers had gone to war.

The princess in her was shocked and angered—but what of the girl!

And the guard—what of them? Evidently they, too, had been so much
surprised by the unprecedented action of the stranger that they had not
even challenged; but that they had no thought to let the thing go
unnoticed was quickly evidenced by the skirring of motors upon the
landing stage and the quick shooting airward of a long-lined patrol
boat.

Thuvia watched it dart swiftly eastward. So, too, did other eyes watch.

Within the dense shadows of the skeel grove, in a wide avenue beneath
o’erspreading foliage, a flier hung a dozen feet above the ground. From
its deck keen eyes watched the far-fanning searchlight of the patrol
boat. No light shone from the enshadowed craft. Upon its deck was the
silence of the tomb. Its crew of a half-dozen red warriors watched the
lights of the patrol boat diminishing in the distance.

“The intellects of our ancestors are with us to-night,” said one in a
low tone.

“No plan ever carried better,” returned another. “They did precisely as
the prince foretold.”

He who had first spoken turned toward the man who squatted before the
control board.

“Now!” he whispered. There was no other order given. Every man upon the
craft had evidently been well schooled in each detail of that night’s
work. Silently the dark hull crept beneath the cathedral arches of the
dark and silent grove.

Thuvia of Ptarth, gazing toward the east, saw the blacker blot against
the blackness of the trees as the craft topped the buttressed garden
wall. She saw the dim bulk incline gently downward toward the scarlet
sward of the garden.

She knew that men came not thus with honourable intent. Yet she did not
cry aloud to alarm the near-by guardsmen, nor did she flee to the
safety of the palace.

Why?

I can see her shrug her shapely shoulders in reply as she voices the
age-old, universal answer of the woman: Because!

Scarce had the flier touched the ground when four men leaped from its
deck. They ran forward toward the girl.

Still she made no sign of alarm, standing as though hypnotized. Or
could it have been as one who awaited a welcome visitor?

Not until they were quite close to her did she move. Then the nearer
moon, rising above the surrounding foliage, touched their faces,
lighting all with the brilliancy of her silver rays.

Thuvia of Ptarth saw only strangers—warriors in the harness of Dusar.
Now she took fright, but too late!

Before she could voice but a single cry, rough hands seized her. A
heavy silken scarf was wound about her head. She was lifted in strong
arms and borne to the deck of the flier. There was the sudden whirl of
propellers, the rushing of air against her body, and, from far beneath
the shouting and the challenge from the guard.

Racing toward the south another flier sped toward Helium. In its cabin
a tall red man bent over the soft sole of an upturned sandal. With
delicate instruments he measured the faint imprint of a small object
which appeared there. Upon a pad beside him was the outline of a key,
and here he noted the results of his measurements.

A smile played upon his lips as he completed his task and turned to one
who waited at the opposite side of the table.

“The man is a genius,” he remarked.

“Only a genius could have evolved such a lock as this is designed to
spring. Here, take the sketch, Larok, and give all thine own genius
full and unfettered freedom in reproducing it in metal.”

The warrior-artificer bowed. “Man builds naught,” he said, “that man
may not destroy.” Then he left the cabin with the sketch.

As dawn broke upon the lofty towers which mark the twin cities of
Helium—the scarlet tower of one and the yellow tower of its sister—a
flier floated lazily out of the north.

Upon its bow was emblazoned the signia of a lesser noble of a far city
of the empire of Helium. Its leisurely approach and the evident
confidence with which it moved across the city aroused no suspicion in
the minds of the sleepy guard. Their round of duty nearly done, they
had little thought beyond the coming of those who were to relieve them.

Peace reigned throughout Helium. Stagnant, emasculating peace. Helium
had no enemies. There was naught to fear.

Without haste the nearest air patrol swung sluggishly about and
approached the stranger. At easy speaking distance the officer upon her
deck hailed the incoming craft.

The cheery “Kaor!” and the plausible explanation that the owner had
come from distant parts for a few days of pleasure in gay Helium
sufficed. The air-patrol boat sheered off, passing again upon its way.
The stranger continued toward a public landing stage, where she dropped
into the ways and came to rest.

At about the same time a warrior entered her cabin.

“It is done, Vas Kor,” he said, handing a small metal key to the tall
noble who had just risen from his sleeping silks and furs.

“Good!” exclaimed the latter. “You must have worked upon it all during
the night, Larok.”

The warrior nodded.

“Now fetch me the Heliumetic metal you wrought some days since,”
commanded Vas Kor.

This done, the warrior assisted his master to replace the handsome
jewelled metal of his harness with the plainer ornaments of an ordinary
fighting man of Helium, and with the insignia of the same house that
appeared upon the bow of the flier.

Vas Kor breakfasted on board. Then he emerged upon the aerial dock,
entered an elevator, and was borne quickly to the street below, where
he was soon engulfed by the early morning throng of workers hastening
to their daily duties.

Among them his warrior trappings were no more remarkable than is a pair
of trousers upon Broadway. All Martian men are warriors, save those
physically unable to bear arms. The tradesman and his clerk clank with
their martial trappings as they pursue their vocations. The schoolboy,
coming into the world, as he does, almost adult from the snowy shell
that has encompassed his development for five long years, knows so
little of life without a sword at his hip that he would feel the same
discomfiture at going abroad unarmed that an Earth boy would experience
in walking the streets knicker-bockerless.

Vas Kor’s destination lay in Greater Helium, which lies some
seventy-five miles across the level plain from Lesser Helium. He had
landed at the latter city because the air patrol is less suspicious and
alert than that above the larger metropolis where lies the palace of
the jeddak.

As he moved with the throng in the parklike canyon of the thoroughfare
the life of an awakening Martian city was in evidence about him.
Houses, raised high upon their slender metal columns for the night were
dropping gently toward the ground. Among the flowers upon the scarlet
sward which lies about the buildings children were already playing, and
comely women laughing and chatting with their neighbours as they culled
gorgeous blossoms for the vases within doors.

The pleasant “kaor” of the Barsoomian greeting fell continually upon
the ears of the stranger as friends and neighbours took up the duties
of a new day.

The district in which he had landed was residential—a district of
merchants of the more prosperous sort. Everywhere were evidences of
luxury and wealth. Slaves appeared upon every housetop with gorgeous
silks and costly furs, laying them in the sun for airing.
Jewel-encrusted women lolled even thus early upon the carven balconies
before their sleeping apartments. Later in the day they would repair to
the roofs when the slaves had arranged couches and pitched silken
canopies to shade them from the sun.

Strains of inspiring music broke pleasantly from open windows, for the
Martians have solved the problem of attuning the nerves pleasantly to
the sudden transition from sleep to waking that proves so difficult a
thing for most Earth folk.

Above him raced the long, light passenger fliers, plying, each in its
proper plane, between the numerous landing stages for internal
passenger traffic. Landing stages that tower high into the heavens are
for the great international passenger liners. Freighters have other
landing stages at various lower levels, to within a couple of hundred
feet of the ground; nor dare any flier rise or drop from one plane to
another except in certain restricted districts where horizontal traffic
is forbidden.

Along the close-cropped sward which paves the avenue ground fliers were
moving in continuous lines in opposite directions. For the greater part
they skimmed along the surface of the sward, soaring gracefully into
the air at times to pass over a slower-going driver ahead, or at
intersections, where the north and south traffic has the right of way
and the east and west must rise above it.

From private hangars upon many a roof top fliers were darting into the
line of traffic. Gay farewells and parting admonitions mingled with the
whirring of motors and the subdued noises of the city.

Yet with all the swift movement and the countless thousands rushing
hither and thither, the predominant suggestion was that of luxurious
ease and soft noiselessness.

Martians dislike harsh, discordant clamour. The only loud noises they
can abide are the martial sounds of war, the clash of arms, the
collision of two mighty dreadnoughts of the air. To them there is no
sweeter music than this.

At the intersection of two broad avenues Vas Kor descended from the
street level to one of the great pneumatic stations of the city. Here
he paid before a little wicket the fare to his destination with a
couple of the dull, oval coins of Helium.

Beyond the gatekeeper he came to a slowly moving line of what to
Earthly eyes would have appeared to be conical-nosed, eight-foot
projectiles for some giant gun. In slow procession the things moved in
single file along a grooved track. A half dozen attendants assisted
passengers to enter, or directed these carriers to their proper
destination.

Vas Kor approached one that was empty. Upon its nose was a dial and a
pointer. He set the pointer for a certain station in Greater Helium,
raised the arched lid of the thing, stepped in and lay down upon the
upholstered bottom. An attendant closed the lid, which locked with a
little click, and the carrier continued its slow way.

Presently it switched itself automatically to another track, to enter,
a moment later, one of the series of dark-mouthed tubes.

The instant that its entire length was within the black aperture it
sprang forward with the speed of a rifle ball. There was an instant of
whizzing—a soft, though sudden, stop, and slowly the carrier emerged
upon another platform, another attendant raised the lid and Vas Kor
stepped out at the station beneath the centre of Greater Helium,
seventy-five miles from the point at which he had embarked.

Here he sought the street level, stepping immediately into a waiting
ground flier. He spoke no word to the slave sitting in the driver’s
seat. It was evident that he had been expected, and that the fellow had
received his instructions before his coming.

Scarcely had Vas Kor taken his seat when the flier went quickly into
the fast-moving procession, turning presently from the broad and
crowded avenue into a less congested street. Presently it left the
thronged district behind to enter a section of small shops, where it
stopped before the entrance to one which bore the sign of a dealer in
foreign silks.

Vas Kor entered the low-ceiling room. A man at the far end motioned him
toward an inner apartment, giving no further sign of recognition until
he had passed in after the caller and closed the door.

Then he faced his visitor, saluting deferentially.

“Most noble—” he commenced, but Vas Kor silenced him with a gesture.

“No formalities,” he said. “We must forget that I am aught other than
your slave. If all has been as carefully carried out as it has been
planned, we have no time to waste. Instead we should be upon our way to
the slave market. Are you ready?”

The merchant nodded, and, turning to a great chest, produced the
unemblazoned trappings of a slave. These Vas Kor immediately donned.
Then the two passed from the shop through a rear door, traversed a
winding alley to an avenue beyond, where they entered a flier which
awaited them.

Five minutes later the merchant was leading his slave to the public
market, where a great concourse of people filled the great open space
in the centre of which stood the slave block.

The crowds were enormous to-day, for Carthoris, Prince of Helium, was
to be the principal bidder.

One by one the masters mounted the rostrum beside the slave block upon
which stood their chattels. Briefly and clearly each recounted the
virtues of his particular offering.

When all were done, the major-domo of the Prince of Helium recalled to
the block such as had favourably impressed him. For such he had made a
fair offer.

There was little haggling as to price, and none at all when Vas Kor was
placed upon the block. His merchant-master accepted the first offer
that was made for him, and thus a Dusarian noble entered the household
of Carthoris.




CHAPTER III.
TREACHERY


The day following the coming of Vas Kor to the palace of the Prince of
Helium great excitement reigned throughout the twin cities, reaching
its climax in the palace of Carthoris. Word had come of the abduction
of Thuvia of Ptarth from her father’s court, and with it the veiled
hint that the Prince of Helium might be suspected of considerable
knowledge of the act and the whereabouts of the princess.

In the council chamber of John Carter, Warlord of Mars, was Tardos
Mors, Jeddak of Helium; Mors Kajak, his son, Jed of Lesser Helium;
Carthoris, and a score of the great nobles of the empire.

“There must be no war between Ptarth and Helium, my son,” said John
Carter. “That you are innocent of the charge that has been placed
against you by insinuation, we well know; but Thuvan Dihn must know it
well, too.

“There is but one who may convince him, and that one be you. You must
hasten at once to the court of Ptarth, and by your presence there as
well as by your words assure him that his suspicions are groundless.
Bear with you the authority of the Warlord of Barsoom, and of the
Jeddak of Helium to offer every resource of the allied powers to assist
Thuvan Dihn to recover his daughter and punish her abductors,
whomsoever they may be.

“Go! I know that I do not need to urge upon you the necessity for
haste.”

Carthoris left the council chamber, and hastened to his palace.

Here slaves were busy in a moment setting things to rights for the
departure of their master. Several worked about the swift flier that
would bear the Prince of Helium rapidly toward Ptarth.

At last all was done. But two armed slaves remained on guard. The
setting sun hung low above the horizon. In a moment darkness would
envelop all.

One of the guardsmen, a giant of a fellow across whose right cheek
there ran a thin scar from temple to mouth, approached his companion.
His gaze was directed beyond and above his comrade. When he had come
quite close he spoke.

“What strange craft is that?” he asked.

The other turned about quickly to gaze heavenward. Scarce was his back
turned toward the giant than the short-sword of the latter was plunged
beneath his left shoulder blade, straight through his heart.

Voiceless, the soldier sank in his tracks—stone dead. Quickly the
murderer dragged the corpse into the black shadows within the hangar.
Then he returned to the flier.

Drawing a cunningly wrought key from his pocket-pouch, he removed the
cover of the right-hand dial of the controlling destination compass.
For a moment he studied the construction of the mechanism beneath. Then
he returned the dial to its place, set the pointer, and removed it
again to note the resultant change in the position of the parts
affected by the act.

A smile crossed his lips. With a pair of cutters he snipped off the
projection which extended through the dial from the external
pointer—now the latter might be moved to any point upon the dial
without affecting the mechanism below. In other words, the eastern
hemisphere dial was useless.

Now he turned his attention to the western dial. This he set upon a
certain point. Afterward he removed the cover of this dial also, and
with keen tool cut the steel finger from the under side of the pointer.

As quickly as possible he replaced the second dial cover, and resumed
his place on guard. To all intents and purposes the compass was as
efficient as before; but, as a matter of fact, the moving of the
pointers upon the dials resulted now in no corresponding shift of the
mechanism beneath—and the device was set, immovably, upon a destination
of the slave’s own choosing.

Presently came Carthoris, accompanied by but a handful of his
gentlemen. He cast but a casual glance upon the single slave who stood
guard. The fellow’s thin, cruel lips, and the sword-cut that ran from
temple to mouth aroused the suggestion of an unpleasant memory within
him. He wondered where Saran Tal had found the man— then the matter
faded from his thoughts, and in another moment the Prince of Helium was
laughing and chatting with his companions, though below the surface his
heart was cold with dread, for what contingencies confronted Thuvia of
Ptarth he could not even guess.

First to his mind, naturally, had sprung the thought that Astok of
Dusar had stolen the fair Ptarthian; but almost simultaneously with the
report of the abduction had come news of the great fetes at Dusar in
honour of the return of the jeddak’s son to the court of his father.

It could not have been he, thought Carthoris, for on the very night
that Thuvia was taken Astok had been in Dusar, and yet—

He entered the flier, exchanging casual remarks with his companions as
he unlocked the mechanism of the compass and set the pointer upon the
capital city of Ptarth.

With a word of farewell he touched the button which controlled the
repulsive rays, and as the flier rose lightly into the air, the engine
purred in answer to the touch of his finger upon a second button, the
propellers whirred as his hand drew back the speed lever, and
Carthoris, Prince of Helium, was off into the gorgeous Martian night
beneath the hurtling moons and the million stars.

Scarce had the flier found its speed ere the man, wrapping his sleeping
silks and furs about him, stretched at full length upon the narrow deck
to sleep.

But sleep did not come at once at his bidding.

Instead, his thoughts ran riot in his brain, driving sleep away. He
recalled the words of Thuvia of Ptarth, words that had half assured him
that she loved him; for when he had asked her if she loved Kulan Tith,
she had answered only that she was promised to him.

Now he saw that her reply was open to more than a single construction.
It might, of course, mean that she did not love Kulan Tith; and so, by
inference, be taken to mean that she loved another.

But what assurance was there that the other was Carthoris of Helium?

The more he thought upon it the more positive he became that not only
was there no assurance in her words that she loved him, but none either
in any act of hers. No, the fact was, she did not love him. She loved
another. She had not been abducted—she had fled willingly with her
lover.

With such pleasant thoughts filling him alternately with despair and
rage, Carthoris at last dropped into the sleep of utter mental
exhaustion.

The breaking of the sudden dawn found him still asleep. His flier was
rushing swiftly above a barren, ochre plain—the world-old bottom of a
long-dead Martian sea.

In the distance rose low hills. Toward these the craft was headed. As
it approached them, a great promontory might have been seen from its
deck, stretching out into what had once been a mighty ocean, and
circling back once more to enclose the forgotten harbour of a forgotten
city, which still stretched back from its deserted quays, an imposing
pile of wondrous architecture of a long-dead past.

The countless dismal windows, vacant and forlorn, stared, sightless,
from their marble walls; the whole sad city taking on the semblance of
scattered mounds of dead men’s sun-bleached skulls—the casements having
the appearance of eyeless sockets, the portals, grinning jaws.

Closer came the flier, but now its speed was diminishing—yet this was
not Ptarth.

Above the central plaza it stopped, slowly settling Marsward. Within a
hundred yards of the ground it came to rest, floating gently in the
light air, and at the same instant an alarm sounded at the sleeper’s
ear.

Carthoris sprang to his feet. Below him he looked to see the teeming
metropolis of Ptarth. Beside him, already, there should have been an
air patrol.

He gazed about in bewildered astonishment. There indeed was a great
city, but it was not Ptarth. No multitudes surged through its broad
avenues. No signs of life broke the dead monotony of its deserted roof
tops. No gorgeous silks, no priceless furs lent life and colour to the
cold marble and the gleaming ersite.

No patrol boat lay ready with its familiar challenge. Silent and empty
lay the great city—empty and silent the surrounding air.

What had happened?

Carthoris examined the dial of his compass. The pointer was set upon
Ptarth. Could the creature of his genius have thus betrayed him? He
would not believe it.

Quickly he unlocked the cover, turning it back upon its hinge. A single
glance showed him the truth, or at least a part of it—the steel
projection that communicated the movement of the pointer upon the dial
to the heart of the mechanism beneath had been severed.

Who could have done the thing—and why?

Carthoris could not hazard even a faint guess. But the thing now was to
learn in what portion of the world he was, and then take up his
interrupted journey once more.

If it had been the purpose of some enemy to delay him, he had succeeded
well, thought Carthoris, as he unlocked the cover of the second dial,
the first having shown that its pointer had not been set at all.

Beneath the second dial he found the steel pin severed as in the other,
but the controlling mechanism had first been set for a point upon the
western hemisphere.

He had just time to judge his location roughly at some place south-west
of Helium, and at a considerable distance from the twin cities, when he
was startled by a woman’s scream beneath him.

Leaning over the side of the flier, he saw what appeared to be a red
woman being dragged across the plaza by a huge green warrior—one of
those fierce, cruel denizens of the dead sea-bottoms and deserted
cities of dying Mars.

Carthoris waited to see no more. Reaching for the control board, he
sent his craft racing plummet-like toward the ground.

The green man was hurrying his captive toward a huge thoat that browsed
upon the ochre vegetation of the once scarlet-gorgeous plaza. At the
same instant a dozen red warriors leaped from the entrance of a nearby
ersite palace, pursuing the abductor with naked swords and shouts of
rageful warning.

Once the woman turned her face upward toward the falling flier, and in
the single swift glance Carthoris saw that it was Thuvia of Ptarth!




CHAPTER IV.
A GREEN MAN’S CAPTIVE


When the light of day broke upon the little craft to whose deck the
Princess of Ptarth had been snatched from her father’s garden, Thuvia
saw that the night had wrought a change in her abductors.

No longer did their trappings gleam with the metal of Dusar, but
instead there was emblazoned there the insignia of the Prince of
Helium.

The girl felt renewed hope, for she could not believe that in the heart
of Carthoris could lie intent to harm her.

She spoke to the warrior squatting before the control board.

“Last night you wore the trappings of a Dusarian,” she said. “Now your
metal is that of Helium. What means it?”

The man looked at her with a grin.

“The Prince of Helium is no fool,” he said.

Just then an officer emerged from the tiny cabin. He reprimanded the
warrior for conversing with the prisoner, nor would he himself reply to
any of her inquiries.

No harm was offered her during the journey, and so they came at last to
their destination with the girl no wiser as to her abductors or their
purpose than at first.

Here the flier settled slowly into the plaza of one of those mute
monuments of Mars’ dead and forgotten past—the deserted cities that
fringe the sad ochre sea-bottoms where once rolled the mighty floods
upon whose bosoms moved the maritime commerce of the peoples that are
gone for ever.

Thuvia of Ptarth was no stranger to such places. During her wanderings
in search of the River Iss, that time she had set out upon what, for
countless ages, had been the last, long pilgrimage of Martians, toward
the Valley Dor, where lies the Lost Sea of Korus, she had encountered
several of these sad reminders of the greatness and the glory of
ancient Barsoom.

And again, during her flight from the temples of the Holy Therns with
Tars Tarkas, Jeddak of Thark, she had seen them, with their weird and
ghostly inmates, the great white apes of Barsoom.

She knew, too, that many of them were used now by the nomadic tribes of
green men, but that among them all was no city that the red men did not
shun, for without exception they stood amidst vast, waterless tracts,
unsuited for the continued sustenance of the dominant race of Martians.

Why, then, should they be bringing her to such a place? There was but a
single answer. Such was the nature of their work that they must needs
seek the seclusion that a dead city afforded. The girl trembled at
thought of her plight.

For two days her captors kept her within a huge palace that even in
decay reflected the splendour of the age which its youth had known.

Just before dawn on the third day she had been aroused by the voices of
two of her abductors.

“He should be here by dawn,” one was saying. “Have her in readiness
upon the plaza—else he will never land. The moment he finds that he is
in a strange country he will turn about—methinks the prince’s plan is
weak in this one spot.”

“There was no other way,” replied the other. “It is wondrous work to
get them both here at all, and even if we do not succeed in luring him
to the ground, we shall have accomplished much.”

Just then the speaker caught the eyes of Thuvia upon him, revealed by
the quick-moving patch of light cast by _Thuria_ in her mad race
through the heavens.

With a quick sign to the other, he ceased speaking, and advancing
toward the girl, motioned her to rise. Then he led her out into the
night toward the centre of the great plaza.

“Stand here,” he commanded, “until we come for you. We shall be
watching, and should you attempt to escape it will go ill with you—much
worse than death. Such are the prince’s orders.”

Then he turned and retraced his steps toward the palace, leaving her
alone in the midst of the unseen terrors of the haunted city, for in
truth these places are haunted in the belief of many Martians who still
cling to an ancient superstition which teaches that the spirits of Holy
Therns who die before their allotted one thousand years, pass, on
occasions, into the bodies of the great white apes.

To Thuvia, however, the real danger of attack by one of these
ferocious, manlike beasts was quite sufficient. She no longer believed
in the weird soul transmigration that the therns had taught her before
she was rescued from their clutches by John Carter; but she well knew
the horrid fate that awaited her should one of the terrible beasts
chance to spy her during its nocturnal prowlings.

What was that?

Surely she could not be mistaken. Something had moved, stealthily, in
the shadow of one of the great monoliths that line the avenue where it
entered the plaza opposite her!

Thar Ban, jed among the hordes of Torquas, rode swiftly across the
ochre vegetation of the dead sea-bottom toward the ruins of ancient
Aaanthor.

He had ridden far that night, and fast, for he had but come from the
despoiling of the incubator of a neighbouring green horde with which
the hordes of Torquas were perpetually warring.

His giant thoat was far from jaded, yet it would be well, thought Thar
Ban, to permit him to graze upon the ochre moss which grows to greater
height within the protected courtyards of deserted cities, where the
soil is richer than on the sea-bottoms, and the plants partly shaded
from the sun during the cloudless Martian day.

Within the tiny stems of this dry-seeming plant is sufficient moisture
for the needs of the huge bodies of the mighty thoats, which can exist
for months without water, and for days without even the slight moisture
which the ochre moss contains.

As Thar Ban rode noiselessly up the broad avenue which leads from the
quays of Aaanthor to the great central plaza, he and his mount might
have been mistaken for spectres from a world of dreams, so grotesque
the man and beast, so soundless the great thoat’s padded, nailless feet
upon the moss-grown flagging of the ancient pavement.

The man was a splendid specimen of his race. Fully fifteen feet towered
his great height from sole to pate. The moonlight glistened against his
glossy green hide, sparkling the jewels of his heavy harness and the
ornaments that weighted his four muscular arms, while the upcurving
tusks that protruded from his lower jaw gleamed white and terrible.

At the side of his thoat were slung his long radium rifle and his
great, forty-foot, metal-shod spear, while from his own harness
depended his long-sword and his short-sword, as well as his lesser
weapons.

His protruding eyes and antennae-like ears were turning constantly
hither and thither, for Thar Ban was yet in the country of the enemy,
and, too, there was always the menace of the great white apes, which,
John Carter was wont to say, are the only creatures that can arouse in
the breasts of these fierce denizens of the dead sea-bottoms even the
remotest semblance of fear.

As the rider neared the plaza, he reined suddenly in. His slender,
tubular ears pointed rigidly forward. An unwonted sound had reached
them. Voices! And where there were voices, outside of Torquas, there,
too, were enemies. All the world of wide Barsoom contained naught but
enemies for the fierce Torquasians.

Thar Ban dismounted. Keeping in the shadows of the great monoliths that
line the Avenue of Quays of sleeping Aaanthor, he approached the plaza.
Directly behind him, as a hound at heel, came the slate-grey thoat, his
white belly shadowed by his barrel, his vivid yellow feet merging into
the yellow of the moss beneath them.

In the centre of the plaza Thar Ban saw the figure of a red woman. A
red warrior was conversing with her. Now the man turned and retraced
his steps toward the palace at the opposite side of the plaza.

Thar Ban watched until he had disappeared within the yawning portal.
Here was a captive worth having! Seldom did a female of their
hereditary enemies fall to the lot of a green man. Thar Ban licked his
thin lips.

Thuvia of Ptarth watched the shadow behind the monolith at the opening
to the avenue opposite her. She hoped that it might be but the figment
of an overwrought imagination.

But no! Now, clearly and distinctly, she saw it move. It came from
behind the screening shelter of the ersite shaft.

The sudden light of the rising sun fell upon it. The girl trembled. The
_thing_ was a huge green warrior!

Swiftly it sprang toward her. She screamed and tried to flee; but she
had scarce turned toward the palace when a giant hand fell upon her
arm, she was whirled about, and half dragged, half carried toward a
huge thoat that was slowly grazing out of the avenue’s mouth onto the
ochre moss of the plaza.

At the same instant she turned her face upward toward the whirring
sound of something above her, and there she saw a swift flier dropping
toward her, the head and shoulders of a man leaning far over the side;
but the man’s features were deeply shadowed, so that she did not
recognize them.

Now from behind her came the shouts of her red abductors. They were
racing madly after him who dared to steal what they already had stolen.

As Thar Ban reached the side of his mount he snatched his long radium
rifle from its boot, and, wheeling, poured three shots into the
oncoming red men.

Such is the uncanny marksmanship of these Martian savages that three
red warriors dropped in their tracks as three projectiles exploded in
their vitals.

The others halted, nor did they dare return the fire for fear of
wounding the girl.

Then Thar Ban vaulted to the back of his thoat, Thuvia of Ptarth still
in his arms, and with a savage cry of triumph disappeared down the
black canyon of the Avenue of Quays between the sullen palaces of
forgotten Aaanthor.

Carthoris’ flier had not touched the ground before he had sprung from
its deck to race after the swift thoat, whose eight long legs were
sending it down the avenue at the rate of an express train; but the men
of Dusar who still remained alive had no mind to permit so valuable a
capture to escape them.

They had lost the girl. That would be a difficult thing to explain to
Astok; but some leniency might be expected could they carry the Prince
of Helium to their master instead.

So the three who remained set upon Carthoris with their long-swords,
crying to him to surrender; but they might as successfully have cried
aloud to _Thuria_ to cease her mad hurtling through the Barsoomian sky,
for Carthoris of Helium was a true son of the Warlord of Mars and his
incomparable Dejah Thoris.

Carthoris’ long-sword had been already in his hand as he leaped from
the deck of the flier, so the instant that he realized the menace of
the three red warriors, he wheeled to face them, meeting their
onslaught as only John Carter himself might have done.

So swift his sword, so mighty and agile his half-earthly muscles, that
one of his opponents was down, crimsoning the ochre moss with his
life-blood, when he had scarce made a single pass at Carthoris.

Now the two remaining Dusarians rushed simultaneously upon the
Heliumite. Three long-swords clashed and sparkled in the moonlight,
until the great white apes, roused from their slumbers, crept to the
lowering windows of the dead city to view the bloody scene beneath
them.

Thrice was Carthoris touched, so that the red blood ran down his face,
blinding him and dyeing his broad chest. With his free hand he wiped
the gore from his eyes, and with the fighting smile of his father
touching his lips, leaped upon his antagonists with renewed fury.

A single cut of his heavy sword severed the head of one of them, and
then the other, backing away clear of that point of death, turned and
fled toward the palace at his back.

Carthoris made no step to pursue. He had other concern than the meting
of even well-deserved punishment to strange men who masqueraded in the
metal of his own house, for he had seen that these men were tricked out
in the insignia that marked his personal followers.

Turning quickly toward his flier, he was soon rising from the plaza in
pursuit of Thar Ban.

The red warrior whom he had put to flight turned in the entrance to the
palace, and, seeing Carthoris’ intent, snatched a rifle from those that
he and his fellows had left leaning against the wall as they had rushed
out with drawn swords to prevent the theft of their prisoner.

Few red men are good shots, for the sword is their chosen weapon; so
now as the Dusarian drew bead upon the rising flier, and touched the
button upon his rifle’s stock, it was more to chance than proficiency
that he owed the partial success of his aim.

The projectile grazed the flier’s side, the opaque coating breaking
sufficiently to permit daylight to strike in upon the powder phial
within the bullet’s nose. There was a sharp explosion. Carthoris felt
his craft reel drunkenly beneath him, and the engine stopped.

The momentum the air boat had gained carried her on over the city
toward the sea-bottom beyond.

The red warrior in the plaza fired several more shots, none of which
scored. Then a lofty minaret shut the drifting quarry from his view.

In the distance before him Carthoris could see the green warrior
bearing Thuvia of Ptarth away upon his mighty thoat. The direction of
his flight was toward the north-west of Aaanthor, where lay a
mountainous country little known to red men.

The Heliumite now gave his attention to his injured craft. A close
examination revealed the fact that one of the buoyancy tanks had been
punctured, but the engine itself was uninjured.

A splinter from the projectile had damaged one of the control levers
beyond the possibility of repair outside a machine shop; but after
considerable tinkering, Carthoris was able to propel his wounded flier
at low speed, a rate which could not approach the rapid gait of the
thoat, whose eight long, powerful legs carried it over the ochre
vegetation of the dead sea-bottom at terrific speed.

The Prince of Helium chafed and fretted at the slowness of his pursuit,
yet he was thankful that the damage was no worse, for now he could at
least move more rapidly than on foot.

But even this meagre satisfaction was soon to be denied him, for
presently the flier commenced to sag toward the port and by the bow.
The damage to the buoyancy tanks had evidently been more grievous than
he had at first believed.

All the balance of that long day Carthoris crawled erratically through
the still air, the bow of the flier sinking lower and lower, and the
list to port becoming more and more alarming, until at last, near dark,
he was floating almost bow-down, his harness buckled to a heavy deck
ring to keep him from being precipitated to the ground below.

His forward movement was now confined to a slow drifting with the
gentle breeze that blew out of the south-east, and when this died down
with the setting of the sun, he let the flier sink gently to the mossy
carpet beneath.

Far before him loomed the mountains toward which the green man had been
fleeing when last he had seen him, and with dogged resolution the son
of John Carter, endowed with the indomitable will of his mighty sire,
took up the pursuit on foot.

All that night he forged ahead until, with the dawning of a new day, he
entered the low foothills that guard the approach to the fastness of
the mountains of Torquas.

Rugged, granitic walls towered before him. Nowhere could he discern an
opening through the formidable barrier; yet somewhere into this
inhospitable world of stone the green warrior had borne the woman of
the red man’s heart’s desire.

Across the yielding moss of the sea-bottom there had been no spoor to
follow, for the soft pads of the thoat but pressed down in his swift
passage the resilient vegetation which sprang up again behind his
fleeting feet, leaving no sign.

But here in the hills, where loose rock occasionally strewed the way;
where black loam and wild flowers partially replaced the sombre
monotony of the waste places of the lowlands, Carthoris hoped to find
some sign that would lead him in the right direction.

Yet, search as he would, the baffling mystery of the trail seemed
likely to remain for ever unsolved.

It was drawing toward the day’s close once more when the keen eyes of
the Heliumite discerned the tawny yellow of a sleek hide moving among
the boulders several hundred yards to his left.

Crouching quickly behind a large rock, Carthoris watched the thing
before him. It was a huge banth, one of those savage Barsoomian lions
that roam the desolate hills of the dying planet.

The creature’s nose was close to the ground. It was evident that he was
following the spoor of meat by scent.

As Carthoris watched him, a great hope leaped into the man’s heart.
Here, possibly, might lie the solution to the mystery he had been
endeavouring to solve. This hungry carnivore, keen always for the flesh
of man, might even now be trailing the two whom Carthoris sought.

Cautiously the youth crept out upon the trail of the man-eater. Along
the foot of the perpendicular cliff the creature moved, sniffing at the
invisible spoor, and now and then emitting the low moan of the hunting
banth.

Carthoris had followed the creature for but a few minutes when it
disappeared as suddenly and mysteriously as though dissolved into thin
air.

The man leaped to his feet. Not again was he to be cheated as the man
had cheated him. He sprang forward at a reckless pace to the spot at
which he last had seen the great, skulking brute.

Before him loomed the sheer cliff, its face unbroken by any aperture
into which the huge banth might have wormed its great carcass. Beside
him was a small, flat boulder, not larger than the deck of a ten-man
flier, nor standing to a greater height than twice his own stature.

Perhaps the banth was in hiding behind this? The brute might have
discovered the man upon his trail, and even now be lying in wait for
his easy prey.

Cautiously, with drawn long-sword, Carthoris crept around the corner of
the rock. There was no banth there, but something which surprised him
infinitely more than would the presence of twenty banths.

Before him yawned the mouth of a dark cave leading downward into the
ground. Through this the banth must have disappeared. Was it his lair?
Within its dark and forbidding interior might there not lurk not one
but many of the fearsome creatures?

Carthoris did not know, nor, with the thought that had been spurring
him onward upon the trail of the creature uppermost in his mind, did he
much care; for into this gloomy cavern he was sure the banth had
trailed the green man and his captive, and into it he, too, would
follow, content to give his life in the service of the woman he loved.

Not an instant did he hesitate, nor yet did he advance rashly; but with
ready sword and cautious steps, for the way was dark, he stole on. As
he advanced, the obscurity became impenetrable black