The Project Gutenberg eBook of E-mail 101
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

*** This is a COPYRIGHTED Project Gutenberg eBook. Details Below. ***
***     Please follow the copyright guidelines in this file.      ***


Title: E-mail 101

Author: John E. Goodwin


        
Release date: July 1, 1993 [eBook #75]
                Most recently updated: February 9, 2012

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/75


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK E-MAIL 101 ***













EMAIL 101 by John Goodwin, this is an Alpha test version, your
suggestions will be included in the Beta test versions, and in
the final editions.


This rough version is missing 8 out of 28 chapters and 1 out of 5
appendices.

Copyright (c) 1993 by John E. Goodwin.  All Rights Reserved.

You may make and distribute verbatim copies of these course notes for
non-commercial purposes using any means, provided this copyright notice
is preserved on all copies.

For information on taking the internetworking course, contact

     John Goodwin (jgoodwin@adcalc.fnal.gov)
     P.O. Box 6022
     St. Charles, IL  60174, U.S.A.
1

<title> E-MAIL 101

If you like those little machines that give you 24 hour access to your
bank account, you'll love the Internet.  I suppose there are still
people who, given a choice, will go to a drive-through teller just so
they can deal with a "live person" instead of a machine.  But even those
people will admit that it is nice to have the option of doing things for
yourself, on your own schedule, anywhere.  Do you remember what it was
like before automatic tellers?  Banks closed at 3 p.m. on weekdays.
Each Saturday you had to guess how much money you would need for the
following week.  If you were wrong you had to cash a check at a food
store (and maybe buy something you didn't want).  And if you were out of
town?  Well, there were always credit cards.

We don't do that anymore.  I think many people go to the automatic
teller because they like the privacy of handling their own business
without having to explain it all to someone else.  And we like the
illusion of having access to our "own" account anytime we want.
There are disadvantages to using an automatic teller card too--you may
have to pay a fee each month or even for each transaction--and you have
to remember to deduct those fees from your account balance or you will
bounce checks.  But I'll bet you feel pretty competent using an
automatic teller and don't lose much sleep worrying over the fees.

This course is designed to give you that same sense of freedom and
competence with the Internet that you have with an automatic teller
machine or the telephone.  With a home computer, a modem, and
communications software, you can connect to other computers over the
phone line to exchange electronic mail (E-mail), trade files, or search
for information.  Many of those computers are connected to the worldwide
network called the Internet.  Some few of them will--for a fee--let
*you* connect to the Internet.  From there you can dial any of 900,000
or more computers, send E-mail to any of 25 million people, and access
hundreds of free, informative services.

In short, you are on the verge of a new method of communicating with
people and machines called "internetworking."  Internetworking lets you:

  o Avoid playing phone tag;

  o Sign up to receive special interest electronic newsletters and
journals;

  o Access hundreds of information services and document collections in
exactly the same way--no need to have hundreds of sets of different
instructions or hundreds of (expensive) special purpose software
packages;

  o Find and communicate with other people who share your interests.

Internetworking is an essential skill for the '90s.  Your children will
find it as common as viewing television or using the telephone.  It
still has a few rough edges--but we'll explain those.

There is actually no single network owned by one company called the
Internet.  Instead, many medium-sized networks have grown together to
create a "phone system" that connects together nearly a million
computers.  Many hundreds of these computers allow some form of public
access.  You can get the latest news or weather, download information
about Government programs or high-tech products, search on-line library
catalogues and databases, download free software, and do many other
things, with little or no monetary investment beyond the cost of your
home computer.

Using the Internet need not be expensive:  you can get on the Internet
for as little as $10 a month if you own (1) a home computer, (2) a $50
modem, and (3) some communications software (under $100).  There are
more expensive ways to connect to the Internet, of course.  These ways
make sense for businesses or organizations that make heavy use of the
network.  But in this course we will discuss methods that cost in the
$10-$40/month range.  These methods are suitable for exploring the net
after hours and for casual use.  We will provide some basic information
about more expensive methods of connecting (Appendix C) so that you can
make informed decisions if your networking needs should increase in the
future.

Internetworking well means mastering a whole host of skills--connecting
two computers together using the Internet is just the beginning.  You
have to learn methods for transferring information from the remote
computer to your own.  This is a complex task that may involve using a
file transfer protocol and compression techniques.

Because the information world is so vast, your biggest problem will most
likely not be connecting to the Internet.  It will be finding what you
want.  Thus, this course covers not only the mechanics of making a
connection and transferring files, but techniques for locating material
as well.  And of course you will want to be savvy about the costs of
different connection methods.  This means estimating whether it will
cost you more per Megabyte to transfer the information or to have it
faxed to you by a friendly librarian.

This course is intended for the general public--students,
businesspersons, librarians, teachers, writers, journalists--in fact
anyone who needs to find information and communicate with others.
Whether you are researching a paper, writing an article, or trying to
get technical information on a product, you will use these techniques
over and over.

Chapters marked with an asterisk are omitted from this edition.


COURSE CONTENTS

1 : The Past and the Future of Internetworking

2 : What Is the Internet?

3 : How Do I Connect to the Internet?

4 : Who Pays for the Internet?

5 : Internet Basics

6 : Getting on the Internet Step by Step

7 : Programs and Pictures

8 : File Compression Methods for Faster Transfer

9 : What to Do When You Only Have E-mail

10 : Employee Development:  How to Get Your Employees Internetworking


Part II  Special Concerns

11 : Special for Businesses

12 : Special for Students and their Parents

13 : Special for Writers, Journalists, Publishers, and Printers

14 : Special for Elementary and High School Teachers

15 : Special for Librarians

16 : Special for Scholars

17 : Special for Churches, Synagogues, and Mosques


Part III  Research, Organization, and Writing

18 : Research Methods I:  Basic Navigation Methods

*19 : Research Methods II:  Usenet Newsgroups

20 : Research Methods III:  Advanced Techniques

*21 : Organizing Information

*22 : Information Structures

*23 : Boolean Logic

*24 : Writing for an Internetworked World:  Basic Problems

*25 : Writing for an Internetworked World:  Getting Through to your
Audience


Part IV  Resources

*26 : The Internet Address Book

27 : Bibliography

*28 : Glossary

Appendix A.  Computer Hints for the *Really* Green

Appendix B.  Using a Modem

*Appendix C.  Technical Details of an Internet Connection

Appendix D.  Just Enough UNIX

Appendix E.  The Ten Best Things To Get If You Only Have E-Mail



<Chapter 1>  The Past and Future of Internetworking

There is an old fashioned way to connect with other computers and share
information and there is a modern way.  It is helpful to compare the two
methods briefly in order to make contact with methods you may already
know and to show off the advantages of using the Internet.

The old fashioned (ca. 1980) method of making contact with other
computers is through a bulletin board service (BBS).  Bulletin board
services grew up in the late 70s as a method for sharing software,
talking, playing games, etc. with a personal computer.  They range in
size from small special interest Bulletin Boards with a local following
to giant national boards like CompuServe, GEnie, and The Source.  You
access a bulletin board with a modem and communication software by
dialing a telephone number.  Of course, if you don't live in the local
area of the BBS you have to use a long distance carrier.  This may add a
couple dollars per hour to the connect fee.

The basic services offered by a Bulletin Board and by the Internet are
similar:

  (1)  Access to a host computer (Internet TELNET command)

  (2)  File transfer capability (Internet FTP command)

  (3)  The ability to contact other BBS members individually (Internet
E-mail)

  (4)  The ability to post messages for general consumption in any of
several catagories. (Usenet Newsgroups)

The difference is that whereas each BBS has its own dialup procedure,
menu interface, file transfer methods, billing policies, and so on, THE
INTERNET USES ONE METHOD FOR ALL COMPUTERS IN THE WORLD.  The savings in
terms of the "learning curve" is staggering.  Once you know how to use
anonymous FTP you know how to get information from *hundreds* of
providers.  It is like the difference between using the postal service
or using a special courier for each person you write a letter to.  Once
you know how to address the envelope and put the stamp on, you can write
anyone.

The Internet has the added savings that any communications software you
buy for it works with all providers.  You do not have to buy (or
customize) special software for each information provider.  Thus you can
use one familiar graphical user interface ("windows" program) to connect
with any computer.  The usual situation where you have to buy a special
"client" program to connect to each kind of "server" is replaced with a
situation in which you have a single program that any "server" out there
has to comply with.  This standardization is the main advantage of using
the Internet.

Bulletin Boards are still around.  In fact, one of the easiest ways to
connect to the Internet is through a national bulletin board service.
One disadvantage of this method is that--as of this writing--national
BBS's like CompuServe offer only E-mail.  You can't FTP or Telnet from
them.  And they often charge per message for E-mail, so using them can
be quite expensive.  There are better ways.


<Chapter 2>  What is the Internet?

The best way to think of the Internet is as a communications medium like
the Telephone, Television, or the Postal Service.  Using the Internet
you can send a any written text by E-mail.  This is rather like mailing
a letter and having it arrive in seconds--three days in the most
backwards parts of the world.  Using a special protocol called File
Transfer Protocol you can transfer text files that are too long to mail
(over about 50 pages) or even transfer graphics and programs.  If E-mail
is the equivalent of "talking" to a person, then Telnet, the third main
Internet service, is equivalent to telephoning a computer.  As long as
you know the password for logging on to a computer, you can access and
search any of nearly a million computers.  Details of E-mail, FTP, and
Telnet are contained in Chapter 5, Internet Basics.

This chapter puts the Internet into context.  Rather than concentrating
on the trees that will occupy us in later chapters, it paints a big
picture of the computing world in which the Internet has evolved.  When
you pick up a telephone receiver you know you can dial households,
businesses, or government offices.  You can dial 800 numbers or 411 for
information.  You know how to get the time or weather, get your credit
card balance, or leave a message on an answering machine.  In short, you
have a good idea of what might possibly be at the other end of the line
and a great deal of experience with negotiating their various
intricacies.  But you are new to the Internet.  Some sense of "what's
out there" in this new world is necessary to avoid getting lost in the
thickets of acronyms, numbers, and procedures developed by different
vendors.

As we approach the middle of the 90s, the normal working situation in
offices is approaching something like this:  there is a Local Area
Network (LAN) connecting together personal computers, workstations, and
mainframes of different makes.  The LAN (pronounced like "land" without
the "d") may be connected to other LANs as part of a Wide Area Network
(WAN).  The WAN may or may not be part of the global network called the
Internet.  In colleges, universities, and research laboratories it
likely is part of the Internet; in the commercial world, except for a
few high-tech companies, it likely is not.  But the difference between
academia and the commerical world is rapidly becoming blurred.

In addition to the LANs and WANs there are many, many home and office
computers that *could* be part of the global network using a modem-to-
host connection.  These computers can be the portable computers of
outside salespersons connecting to the central office to file a report,
a computer in a home-operated desktop publishing company connecting
briefly to the Internet to get a graphic for a newsletter, or a parent
sending E-mail to their child at college.


<Section 2.1>  Getting Over Shell-Shock

Let's face it.  Not many members of the public--even the computer
literate public-are on the Internet.  There are three reasons that using
the Internet for the first time can be rather intimidating, even though
it is actually rather simple to use, when you get down to the nitty-
gritty of internetworking:

  o  Getting on to the Internet can be a little bit complicated;

  o  The capability of logging on to computers you've never used before
by its very nature means facing unfamiliar--and hence uncomfortable--
situations; and

  o  The world is a very big place.

I like to think of the first problem--getting on to the Internet--by
remembering what it was like using an "alternative" long distance
service before the breakup of the Bell monopoly.  People who used the
alternative carriers had to dial all sorts of access codes--very often a
local access number, a credit card number, a security code, *and* the
number of the party they were calling.  They knew that whatever came
after that was going to be easier.

That's what getting on the Internet is like.  You may have to dial a
local access number, get your modem settings right, and type the right
magic combination of words; but after all that, actually *using* the
Internet is simple.  We'll talk you through the initial steps--after a
while (and some frustration) it will be as unconscious as unlocking your
front door or tuning a television set.

The second problem is a little more substantial.  Using the Internet,
you can get yourself into situations that are, well, experimental.
Because the Internet gives you the freedom to "go anywhere" and "do
anything"--at least if you know the passwords--you can uncover strange
incompatibilities and unfamiliar systems.  I call this experience "shell
shock".  At some point you will likely find yourself face to face with a
computer program that expects you to type a command you don't happen to
know.

You can mostly avoid such situations by only trying things about which
you have good information.  The situation is not much different from
using a telephone:  if you stick to well-worn paths like dialing local
numbers or simple long distance calls, you will have little trouble; but
if you start dialing other countries or special numbers you may be in
for a surprise or two.

When you do log on to a new (previously unknown) computer, you can
expect to come face to face with something called a "shell prompt".
Shell prompts look like this:

     %        (or some other obscure symbol, like a dollar-sign)

or this:

     mail>    (a favourite--means you're in some sort of mail program)

or like this:

     prez23:

(means 23rd command since you logged into computer "prez").

A prompt means the other computer expects you to type a command for its
"shell", or "command interpreter".  The shell is the outer layer that
you, the user, interact with.

Two other types of "user interfaces" you might encounter are:

  o  menu systems that give you choice of numbers

  o  "window" systems or graphical user interfaces (GUIs, pronounced
"gooey").

Menu systems are popular on bulletin board services, and usually present
no problem to the novice.  Their weakness is that they get cloying after
about five minutes.  Most menu systems that are designed to be used for
that length of time or longer have a "command mode", where you get--you
guessed it--a shell prompt.

Even windowing systems (you know if you have one of these) very often
give you a window that "emulates a terminal", i.e. that gives you a
shell prompt inside.

So, you see, in each of the three common user interfaces--command line,
menu-driven, or graphical user interface--you will likely encounter, at
some time in your life, a shell prompt.  Advice on things that will
likely work to get you started is given here and in Appendix A.  Some
experience of other kinds of computers, especially computers that use
the UNIX operating system is useful.  Some tips about using UNIX and
other operating systems you may not have encountered before is given in
Appendix D.

If you do get stuck, whether by being experimental or just by accident,
it is helpful to remember a few points:

  o  You can always disconnect from a remote service by using your
communications software to "hang up".

  o  If the computer gives you a strange symbol like a percent sign or a
dollar sign and just sits and stares at you, you can try "help" or "?"
to try to find out what the computer expects, or else try "exit",
"quit", "bye", "logoff", or something similar, to return to where you
were before.

  o  Many times, when you log on to a system, you will get instructions
on how to get further help or how to "escape" back to your own system.
You should remember these or write them down!

  o  As a last resort, exit the communications program (and all other
active programs) and shut off your computer, turn off your modem, and
disconnect it from the phone line.  Be sure to do these steps in the
order prescribed.  It is unwise (though tempting) to simply turn your
computer off and on, or to pull the plug on your modem with your
computer running.

More suggestions for the inexperienced are given in Appendix A.


The final hurdle to using the Internet is that the world, even the world
of the Internet, is indeed a very large place.  When using the Internet
you have to decide:

  o  where to go;

  o  what information you want (and where it might be); and

  o  how to get to it (and get it back home intact).

For a system as vast as the Internet, these are hard decisions.  Often,
the only strategy that works is to explore and try different things.
This course is designed to get you over the initial hurdles, give you a
fair grounding in methods that work, and point you in the right
direction.  The exploration is up to you.  As an initial orientation, we
describe the "three worlds of the known Internet" in the next section.


<Section 2.2>  The Three Worlds of the Known Internet

The Internet, like ancient Gaul, is divided into three parts.  These
parts are not so much territories as worlds, each with their own sets of
assumptions, favorite dialects, and favored equipment.  We may
conveniently refer to them as the "PC world", the "UNIX world", and the
"Mainframe world".  Here's a dossier on each of the three worlds:

     World:  Personal Computer (PC)
     Typical Equipment:  IBM PC and clones (85%) , Macintosh (15%)
     Conventional Operating Systems:  MS-DOS, OS/2
     Windowing Systems:  Windows, MacOS
     Typical Size:  PC ($1k to $5k typical; few $100 used)
     Clientele:  Mixed--Business, Home users, just about everybody

     World:  (mostly UNIX) workstation
     Typical Equipment:  Sun Workstation, VAXStations, other vendors
     Conventional Operating Systems:  UNIX (two major dialects), VMS
     Windowing System:  X Windows
     Typical Size:  Workstation ($5k and up)
     Clientele:  Engineering/Scientific users; more and more businesses

     World:  Mainframe or Minicomputer
     Typical Equipment:  IBM (various), Digital Equipment VAXes
     Conventional Operating Systems:  VM, VMS, UNIX
     Windowing Systems:  X Windows, if available
     Typical Size:  Minicomputer or Mainframe ($10k to millions)
     Clientele:  Big Business, Universities, Government

The neat picture of three worlds is distorted somewhat by a tendency for
each of the worlds to have two (or a few) major options, either in
choice of equipment, operating system, or vendor.  So, for example, the
PC world is split into two camps, the MS-DOS people and the Mac people.
Similarly, the UNIX world is split into the "BSD" workstations and
"System V" (i.e. "5") workstations.

The three worlds are reflected somewhat in networking.  The Internet is
dominated by minicomputers and workstations running UNIX and VMS, with
an ever increasing influx of PCs running MS-DOS and Macs.  Machines
running other operating systems often put a "UNIX-like" foot forward, so
the user can almost believe he or she is dealing with UNIX machines.
There is a certain sense that the UNIX software is the standard for the
Internet.  Software tends to appear on UNIX machines first and then be
"ported" to other machines.

What makes it possible for all these disparate machines to talk to each
other is the "Internet Protocol" (known more formally as TCP/IP, for
Transport Control Protocol/Internet Protocol).  TCP/IP can be thought of
as a set of rules for two computers to use when they communicate with
each other, even if they are not from the same vendor.

We are used to thinking of computer systems as having "software" and
"hardware", but it is closer to the truth to say that complicated
systems like the Internet have many levels--in the case of the Internet
as many as seven--ranging from "very software" to "very hardware".  Each
level has its own set of rules, called its protocol.  The TCP/IP
protocol belongs to two of the middle levels.  At the moment, the most
common protocol for the two most "very hardware" levels is "Ethernet"
(looks rather like the coaxial cable used for cable TV), while the "very
software" levels are completely dependent on the vendor.  In fact, it is
this profusion of levels which lets the Internet work on just about any
kind of hardware and with software from many different vendors.

Anyway, the Internet grew up as several medium-sized networks, all
having diffent "very hardware" and "very software", but using the TCP/IP
protocol for their middle layers, were connected together.  Two of the
first, and biggest, nets to adopt the Internet Protocol were ARPAnet--
Internet was first designed for this one--the network for what used to
be called DARPA (the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency of the
U.S. Department of Defense), and NSFnet, a network connecting
universities and government laboratories for the U.S. National Science
Foundation.  These and other large networks form the "backbone" of the
Internet.  But today there are hundreds of smaller nets hooked on to the
backbones.

There *are* big networks that don't use TCP/IP.  For example, in the
context of IBM mainframes at large universities and research
institutions, BITnet (The "Because It's Time" Network) emerged.  This
large worldwide network does not use the Internet protocol.  BITnet can
be reached from the Internet through special translators called
gateways, but it is definitely a different network.  Occasionally one
encounters problems that can be traced to this fact.


<Section 2.3>  The Future of the Internet

The future of any technology is difficult to forcast, and I do not
profess to know what the future holds for the Internet.  Some
predictions that various forcasters have made for internetworking (and
telecommunications in general) are:

  o  A proposal for a data "superhighway" called the NREN (National
Research and Education Network) will pass the U.S. Congress.  This is an
upgrade for the Internet.

  o  Commercial use of the Internet will become more common and new
schemes for charging for its use will emerge.

  o  The Internet will be handed by the government over to AT&T and the
other "telecoms", who will charge so much to access it that the whole
scheme will collapse.

  o  Optical Fiber will replace Coaxial Cable (Ethernet protocol) as the
most common standard for LANs.

  o  The Internet will enter the home over ordinary phone lines.

  o  The Internet will enter the home over existing Cable TV coaxial
cable.

  o  The Internet will enter the home through newly strung optical fiber
as part of a unified system for Telephony, Cable TV, and the data
communication, using [insert your favorite protocol here] as a standard.

  o  Personal Computers will replace telephones, answering machines,
stereos, CD players, and VCRs--maybe even TV!--as a single, universal
device for home use.  Sounds like a good thing to connect to the NREN.

  o  Computer and telephone technology will become so intertwined that
it is hard to tell the difference.  One product, already on the market,
is described as "[a handheld] alphanumeric pager, an XT-compatible
computer with a backlit screen and PCMCIA Type III slot, a fax/modem, a
cellular and land-line phone, and a voice recorder"!

You are welcome to believe all or none of these predictions.


<Chapter 3>  How Do I Connect To the Internet?

Connecting to the Internet involves several steps:

  (1) Getting your modem and communications software working together

  (2) Connecting to a provider over the phone lines (or a LAN)

  (3) Using Internet services

For the first step you will have to rely on the manuals that came with
your modem and software.  Appendix B contains a discussion of some of
the obscurer terminology associated with modem settings.  You might want
to read it if your manual is not well written.

Actually, you do not have to know about the second step in great detail.
Mostly it is a matter of knowing enough to intellegently choose a
provider.  Each provider will have a specific set of steps--modem
settings, access numbers, passwords, etc.--that you need to follow in
order to get from you to the provider.  Don't lose hope!  Once you get
there you've finished the hardest part.  Chapter 6 contains very
explicit instructions for connecting to one particular service, DELPHI.

Step 3 is the subject of the rest of this course--what you can do once
you're on.  The basics are discussed in the next chapter.


<Section 3.1>  Connection Methods

In theory, there are three ways to connect to the Internet from a
personal computer or workstation:

  (1) Your PC may have a direct connection.  This means that it is part
of a Local Area Network (LAN) that is in turn connected to one of the
component Wide Area Networks of the Internet.  Your computer will have
its own Internet Protocol (IP) Address.  This type of connection is
common in offices, especially of high-tech firms, but definitely not for
home use.

  (2) You may have a connection to a "host" computer that is directly
connected to the net.  If you can use a modem to connect your home PC to
the mainframe at the office and the mainframe is on the net, then you
can get an Internet connection that way.  But what if your office
doesn't have a mainframe on the net?  You can still subscribe to a
service that makes a host computer available to the public.  This is
presently the cheapest and most common method for public access to the
net.

  (3) There is a connection method in between cases (1) and (2) called a
Serial Line Internet Protocol (SLIP) connection.  You dial up a special
host computer--just like case (2)--called a SLIP-server.  The difference
is that the SLIP server gives you a temporary IP address and talks to
your computer using the Internet Protocol.  This requires your
computer's software to speak SLIP.  Your computer thinks it is using
case (1) even though your actual connection is closer to step 2.  The
advantage of fooling your terminal into thinking it has a direct
connection is that it can use all the fancy, free software developed for
computers with direct connections.

The software for a SLIP connection is being built into all new
communications software.  If you just bought or upgraded your software,
you probably have SLIP capability already.  The catch?  SLIP is too slow
on a cheap 2400 baud modem.  But if you buy a fast FAX modem it works
fine.  That's one reason that a $350 FAX modem is a good investment.  It
is fast enough for SLIP and gives you the ability to send and receive
FAXes as well.

SLIP technology is still rather new and somewhat experimental, so this
discussion will focus on the old reliable--method 2.  How do you find a
service that will give the public access to the Internet?

Depending on where you live, you may have a provider you can call in
your local area code.  If not, then most of your problem will be finding
the cheapest way to make a long distance phone call.  This book does not
have a list of providers, since such a list will get out of date
rapidly.  Instead, it gives you one cheap way to get on the Internet,
then gives you instructions on how to find out who the providers are and
what their rates are.  I would rather teach you how to look out for
yourself than just give you some outdated advice.  This method also has
the advantage that one set of instructions works for everybody.  That
wouldn't be true if I listed 20 or 30 providers.  Instructions are given
in "Gettin on the Internet Step by Step."


<Section 3.2>  Types of Internet Providers

As I said, most of the problem of getting on the net occurs when you
live in an area that doesn't have a LOCAL provider.  Basically there are
three kinds of providers and three ways to get to them:

  (1) Providers of direct connections.  If you are setting up a business
and need a high volume direct connection for your office Local Area
Network and can afford several thousand a year at least, you will want
to consider these high-end providers.  They are not relevant to our
discussion.  (But see Appendix C for more information).

  (2) There are several regional networks and one national one that
specialize in low cost PC-to-host or SLIP connections.  Costs range from
$20-40 a month to $2000 a year, depending on the services you need.
Performance Systems International (PSI) is a major provider of this kind
of service.  Other networks offer services similar to PSI, although PSI
has the most extensive nationwide service at this time.  This service
can be very competitive with BBS type service (see below) if you are a
frequent user of the net or need to send more than an occasional E-mail
message.  It is definitely worth a look.

  (3) Many computer bulletin board services offer E-mail or even
Internet connections for around $10-20 per month.  Be very careful to
check out the connection charges.  If you are not careful you could be
charged for using the bulletin board (per hour), using the Internet, the
long-distance connection, a surcharge for daytime use, and a per message
charge for E-mail!  One of the purposes of this book is to explain the
minefield of charges so you don't get burned.  The service recommended
bundles all the charges up front so there are no surprises.

Generally speaking, connecting to the Internet through a BBS is the best
method for the explorer.  Once you've determined that you need the
Internet on a regular basis, one of the regional networks or PSI is
probably the most economical route.

Unless you are fortunate enough to live in an area where an Internet
provider is a local call away, you will have to contend with long
distance charges.  Actually, these can be as low as $2 an hour and are
sometimes bundled in with the network connection charge.


<Section 3.3>  Finding the Cheapest Long Distance Method

There are three basic methods of paying for long distance:

  (1)  You just pay for a call to another area code.  This is very
expensive and not recommended.

  (2)  You use a provider with a toll free (800) number and pay for the
call in a higher connect charge.  This is also very expensive.

  (3)  You use a Public Data Network after hours and pay around $2 an
hour (may be included).

Actually, the last method is the only workable one.  There are a number
of PDN's.

  CompuServe has a data network.  You do not have to join CompuServe to
use it.

  PSI has its own data network with many points of presence around the
US and abroad.  These are divided into Class A and Class B, depending on
the level of service provided.

  Tymenet and SprintNet are two other public data networks.  You may
have heard of the SprintNet service PC Pursuit.  For a monthly fee this
gives you many BBS nationwide as well as any computer that can be
reached by SprintNet.

In general, for a first experiment we recommend the DELPHI BBS and
SprintNet.  DELPHI includes the SprintNet surcharge in its $13/month
bill (after hours use only--daytime is expensive everywhere).  At this
writing you get 5 free hours the first month and 4 hours per month after
that.  Additional hours are $4 each.  There is also a 20 hours for $20
plan.  Additional hours are $2 each with this plan.  Detailed
instructions on how to sign up are given in "Connecting to the Internet
Step by Step."


<Chapter 4>  Who Pays for the Internet?

All this talk of cost may be making you edgy.  Eventually, everyone
using the Internet must face the fear--if I am calling up a computer in
Switzerland won't I be billed for the call?  The marvelous thing about
the Internet is that although there is plenty of expense involved in
getting on it, there is no additional expense associated with what you
do after you are connected.  THE WHOLE WORLD IS ON LOCAL.  Thus, you may
have to pay for a $2 an hour call to Massachussetts, for your PC, your
modem and software, and a connect fee to your internet provider.  But
you DO NOT HAVE TO PAY FOR EACH AND EVERY INTERNET CALL.

Since most people find it hard to believe that you can send mail
anywhere in the world or dial up a computer on the other side of the
globe without paying a special charge, I will spend some time explaining
who does pay for the Internet and how those costs are reflected back to
the user.  One way or another you do pay for network usage, but these
payments are not in the form of a direct billing for each call.

First, you already know that there is no Internet, Inc. that monitors
all the calls and bill customers.  Instead there are hundreds of smaller
networks that act as relays.  Those networks *could* charge their
customers for each call, based on how much time it takes and where it
goes, but since no one is charging them, they have no real incentive to
pass on costs.  Instead they charge a flat fee--usually based on connect
time, but for a 24 hour connection just a flat yearly fee.

Now network traffic does use up resources.  Basically, the Internet
works like a potluck supper.  Everyone with a direct connection allows
some of their system resources to be used by messages that are just
"passing through".  They allow this because other systems allow them the
same privilege.  Thus, it is in everyone's interest to allow some of
their resources to be consumed by other persons' messages, because
everyone comes out ahead.

So, sites with direct connections pay real costs in terms of lost
computing cycles, extra cabling, fancier equipment, and lost disk space.
These costs are passed on to their customers or shouldered by government
subsidy.  But there are no direct charges associated with using the
system.

In the early days of the Internet, Government subsidy of the backbone
networks was crucial.  The backbone was built with government funds and
it was government funds that paid for the extra equipment needed by the
universities and laboratories that carried more traffic than they
generated.  With the development of commercial nets alternatives to the
Government-sponsored backbone arose.  The Government subsidy is still
important, but becomming less so every year.

So, the short answer is that you pay for the network.  You either pay
your provider a flat fee or you pay as a taxpayer for Government
subsidized network resources.  Most of the cost you actually see will be
in your own equipment, the cost of placing a phone call, and whatever
your provider charges you.



<Chapter 5>  Internet Basics

We've talked a lot about the Internet, but how do you actually use it?
There are three basic skills on which all Internet use is based:

  Electronic Mail (E-mail)

  File Transfer Protocol (FTP)

  Telnet

All three commands rely on the Internet addressing scheme.  An Internet
"telephone number" of another computer is its Internet Protocol (IP)
address, a number that looks like this:

     225.225.12.38

This form, called "dotted decimal," is still required by some computers.
But, to make IP addresses easier for humans, this telephone number has
another form which is easier to remember:

     hoople.usnd.edu

This means that computer ("node") named "hoople" is located at the
University of Southern North Dakota.  The last component, ".edu", means
that the institution is in the educational domain.  .  Other domain
names look like this:

  .edu : educational institutions

  .gov : government (research laboratories and

  .com : commercial businesses

  .org : nonprofit organizations

  .mil : military installations

In addition to these domain names, there are many two-letter country
codes, e.g.

  .ca  : Canada

  .jp  : Japan

  .uk  : United Kingdom

  .us  : United States

and many more.

To send electronic mail to someone over the Internet, all you need to
know is their "username", or "handle".  This is followed by an at-sign,
the node name, and any domain names.  Thus

     joe@locoweed.chi.il.us

donotes a private citizen in Chicago, Illinois, in the U.S.  Joe's
computer is called "locoweed".

As another (real) example,

     president@whitehouse.gov

is the E-mail address of the U.S. President.

In the examples that follow we will give details for a typical
character-oriented computer.  Windowing systems with menus, dialog
boxes, and so on will hide many of these details, but they are happening
behind the scenes.  Also, once you are connected, you may be faced with
an old-fashioned command-line system.


<Section 5.1>  Electronic Mail (E-mail)

The details of using the mail system depend on your system, but
basically it looks like this:

     % mail   <enter the mail program with the MAIL command, or
whatever>

     Welcome to Mail, Version 99.3 . . .

     mail>  send

     To:  president@whitehouse.gov
     Cc:  vice.president@whitehouse.gov  <or return if you don't want a
carbon sent to anyone>
     Subj:  I'm on Internet

     Type your message.  Control-Z to exit

     Bill--

     I just got my Internet connection today.  My address is
     pdq@hoople.usnd.edu.

     Give my best to Al,

       PDQ

     <type control-Z or do whatever your system needs to signal an end
of the message>

     %   <your system is now ready for your next command>


<Section 5.2>  Telnet

In addition to using an Internet address to send E-mail, you can use it
to call a computer.  This is rather like dialing up a computer with a
modem, except that the local computer (the one you called with *your*
modem) is calling up the remote computer:

     your PC or Mac  -->  "local computer"  -->  "remote computer"

The example assumes that "home>" is the shell prompt given by your local
computer and that "%" is the prompt given by the remote computer (see
Section 2.2 on "shell prompts").  So remember, you don't type them.

     home> telnet hoople.usnd.edu   <type this on your "home" computer>

     Welcome to node HOOPLE.  Now running Opus 2.0

     username: pdq
     password: <type your password here>

     Last login 23:14:55 15-JUN-1752
     You have mail.

     %  <now type whatever commands you like until . . . >

     % logoff <or bye or quit or exit or whatever>

     Session with hoople.usnd.gov terminated at 21:19.

     home>  <now continue issuing commands on your home computer>

This method of connecting to another computer is called "telnetting".
In effect, you have used the local computer to telephone the remote
computer.  You can now do anything on the remote computer (with certain
restrictions) you could do if you were "actually" logged on.

  SPECIAL PROBLEMS WITH TELNETTING

Sometimes telnetting will put you into a menu-type program or even a
"screen oriented" program.  A special problem here is getting the other
computer to recognize what type of screen you have.  Since most
communications software "emulates a terminal", this amounts to telling
the other system what type of terminal your communications system is
emulating.

E.g., on a UNIX system you might type:

     % set term vt100

to tell the other system that your communications software thinks it is
a VT100 terminal (a very common choice for emulation programs).

If you don't get this exactly right, your telnet session will "sort of
work".  It's probably not worth spending a lot of time on this problem
for a brief contact with the other computer.  If you are going to work
on the remote computer every day, however, you will want to get it
right.  Most "flaky" behavior can be traced to this problem.


<Section 5.3>  File Transfer Protocol (FTP)

It is easy to transfer files over the Internet using a special protocol
called FTP.  FTP takes the place of programs like XModem or Kermit that
may be familiar to you if you use a bulletin board service.  Now, you
might ask, if FTP transfers a file, what is the differnce between
sending E-mail and FTP; why prefer one over the other?

First of all, FTP avoids certain restrictions on the type of file sent;
in particular, you can send binary (non-text) files like programs and
pictures; and you are not restricted to any particular length, as is
often the case with mail programs.

Not only that, with FTP you can "browse" a directory of files before
choosing one.  You can move up and down the directory hierarchy and list
files, looking for the one you want.

Finally, FTP lets you get places that you may not have an account (or a
friend to send you mail).  The method for doing this, called "anonymous
FTP", is described in the next section.  There are several hundred
"anonymous FTP sites" worldwide, with large collections of programs,
textfiles, and graphics.  Anonymous FTP is the Internet equivalent of
publishing--a very important topic indeed.


<Section 5.4>  Anonymous FTP


Further facility with Anon. FTP requires a little knowledge of the UNIX
operating system.  See Appendix D for an introduction.



<Chapter 6>  Getting on the Internet Step by Step

This course takes a different approach to .  Rather than

In particular, you should contact the following for information.


STEP 1.  SIGN UP WITH A PROVIDER (example DELPHI)

To get on the Internet you need:

  1.  a home computer,

  2.  a 1200 or 2400 baud modem that understands AT commands ("Hayes
Command Set Compatible"),

  3.  communications software, and

  4.  a credit card.

This example assumes that you are signing up with the bulletin board
service DELPHI.  DELPHI has no commercial relationship with the author.
It was chosen for an example because its rates are typical of the low
end of the market, it offers nationwide service, it includes afterhours
access by SprintNet in its basic fee, and because at this time it offers
5 free hours of Internet access to new subscribers.

You should definitely consider other providers.  You can get information
about other providers once you're on the Internet.  In fact, that will
be one of your first steps below.

  1.  Set your modem to 2400 (or 1200) baud, 8 bits, NO parity, 1 stop
bit, full duplex, local echo and auto linefeeds off, XON/XOFF on, VT100
emulation.  (see the manual for your modem, the manual for your
communications software, and Appendix A if you need help)

Don't worry if some of the options are missing.  Usually, for example,
full duplex implies local echo off and vice versa, so your software may
not list these as separate options.

  2.  Use your communications software to issue (or type directly to
your modem) the command ATDT 1 800 365 4656.  If you have a pulse-dial
phone your will use ATDP instead of ATDT.

  3.  DELPHI will give you explicit instructions, but for reference they
will look like this:

    A.  Make sure it is after 6 or 7 p.m. or on a weekend--unless you
want a $9 surcharge for daytime access.

    B.  Dial your local SprintNet access number (local call!):  ATDT 123
4567.

    C.  After "CONNECT 2400", type @D ("D" must be capital)

    D.  After "terminal=" type <CR>, i.e. carriage return.

    E.  At the @-sign type

        @C DELPHI

    F.  After Username: type

        Username:  YOURNAME
        Password:  OPENSESAME

Type your own username and password of course.


  4.  If at anytime you forget your Sprintnet access number, or if you
are out of town, you can look up SprintNet numbers as follows.

STEP 2.  Your First E-mail
    Get PDIAL, NIXPUB, INTERNET RESOURCE GUIDE, Info on PSI
    Info on LISTSERV and signing up for E-mail

STEP 3.  Your First Anonyomous FTP

    Get surfing the internet

STEP 4.  Your First Telnet

    Getting Public Access UNIX and reading Usenet news


STEP 5.  First E-mail
    Getting Information on PSI
    Getting Information on LISTSERV

You can do many, many things with the Internet.  The information you
have retrieved, especially the Internet Guides, will give you other
ideas.  We will go over some of the retrieval methods in Part III of
this course.  For now, you should experiment and explore, using the
information you have as a starting point.  The experience you gain will
be useful when we come to the more systematic study of Internet research
methods later.



<Chapter 7>  Programs and Pictures

Evenually, as you gain experience finding and transfering information,
you will want to try you hand at transferring binary files containing
pictures or free software from one of the large FTP archives like

  wustl.edu

  sumex-aim.stanford.edu (Macintosh software)

  simtel-20.mil (IBM and compatible software)

In fact, some of the first software you will want to get is software for
compressing and uncompressing files (see next Chapter), processing
graphics ("image files"), and perhaps some games.

First, what is a binary file?  A binary file is one that you can't read.
Unlike text, which consists of groups of eight bit code letters
representing "a", "b", and so on, binary files have bits that are meant
to be read only by programs.  You cannot "look" at them by typing them
out or with a word processor--unless the word processor understands the
format of the file.  Expensive word processing programs--including the
most popular ones like Word Perfect and Microsoft Word--are increasingly
able to read a large variety of binary files.

Frequently encountered binary files include:

  1.  Files that use proprietary formats, such as word-processing
programs, spreadsheets, database programs, etc.  These files contain
formatting (like italics, underlines, etc.) and perhaps graphics, and
other goodies beyond the simple text.

  2.  "Application Programs".  These are programs written in (the
binary) machine language that your computer understands.  They are
"compiled" from text files of "source code" written in a programming
language.  Vendors almost never make their source code available--except
for free software, which you may have to compile yourself.

  3.  Text files that have been compressed to about half their size with
one of the popular compression programs.  Compression makes texts files
binary.  Compression doesn't do much for files that are already binary
unless the data they contain is very repetitive.

  4.  Files containing graphics like GIF, TIFF, PICT, or JPEG files.
More on this below.

Transfering binary files is as easy as transfering text files once you
understand the potential problems:

  1.  Most FTP programs start you out in TEXT mode.  This means that
text files are *translated* when they go from computer to computer on
their way to you.  This is fatal to binary files because their bit
pattern has nothing to do with the groups of eight bits that make up
text.

  2.  Even text files have slight compatibility problems because the
three "worlds"--IBM, Macintosh, and UNIX--use a different control
character to represent "return", "enter", or "newline."  Translation
between the different dialects is handled automatically in TEXT mode
transfers.  It is also the main reason why text files cannot be
transfered in BINARY mode.

The two control characters involved are called "linefeed" (LF) and
"carriage return" (CR):

     IBM PC and compatibles : <LF> <CR>

     Macintosh and VAX : <CR>

     UNIX : <LF>

  3.  As mentioned above, text files are often compressed to save space.
This means that you need a program to uncompress them before you read
them--and that you have to transfer them in BINARY mode.

The most common compression programs and common file extensions are:

     IBM PC and compatibles : PKZIP and PKUNZIP (.ZIP)

     Macintosh : Stuffit and UnStuffit archives (.sit)

     UNIX : compress and uncompress (.Z) and tape archive (.tar) with
both together being most common (.tar.Z or .taz).  Note capital "Z".

UNIX also has the gzip/gunzip command pair.  gzip files usually have the
extension ".z" (*small* z) or ".tgz" if they are also tape archive
files.

Fortunately you can usually find free software for you computer that
will uncompress formats from other computer models.  For current
information on compression software, see the FAQ for the newsgroup
comp.compression (ftp://rtfm.mit.edu/xxx).

  4.  Conversely, sometimes binary files are converted to a sort of
ASCII that looks like gibberish so that they can be mailed or
transferred in TEXT mode--but again you need a program that translates
them back to binary.  Sometimes we encounter the ultimate absurdity, a
text file that is compressed then re-encoded as ASCII for mailing.
Actually this makes sense if a large number of related text files are
stored in a compressed "archive".

The most common programs for this are:

     uuencode/uudecode for UNIX (used for Usenet news postings of binary
files and for mailing programs)  The file extension (rarely encountered
because there is little reason to store files in this format) is ".uue".

     BinHex for the Macintosh (.hqx)  Often combined with Stuffit
(.sit.hqx).  This is a common method for distributing all the files that
come with a program as a single file.

uuencoded files can be recognized by the fact that every line begins
with a capital "M" and is exactly the same length.  The file starts with
the word "begin" and ends with "end"  The translating program needs
these words, but nothing above or below them.  Often a uuencoded file is
split into several parts for transmission and must be reassembled (and
stripped of mail headers, etc.) in a word processing program before it
is decoded.  If you do this be sure to save the resulting file as a text
file and not in the proprietary format of the word processing program!


<Section 7.2>  What To Do With Graphics

The second topic of this chapter is graphic images.  Graphics are very
important for Desktop Publishers--writers of newsletters, businesses
that prepare their own brochures, and small printshops.  Pictures can be
stored in separate files or, in some cases, embedded in other formats
such as the proprietary format of Microsoft Word files.  Picture files
take up a large amount of space--especially big pictures at high
resolution.  1 Megabyte is a typical size for a smallish picture at
moderate resolution.  Thus, one picture is worth about 500 pages of
text!

The lifecycle of a typical graphic goes something like this:

  STEP 1.  Capturing (scanning) of photograph with optical scanner or
with a special "video" camera

The better sort of optical scanner looks like a small xerox machine.
There are also cheaper hand-held models.  Flatbed scanners cost in the
$1000+ range so you are not likely to have one unless you are in the
business.  Most likely, the casual user will get a graphic from someone
else, from a collection of "clip art", or create the graphic from
scratch in a drawing program.

  STEP 2.  Storage in a file using an interchange format

However the image is obtained, it has to be stored on disk before it can
be used.  There are perhaps twenty or so common formats, but those found
most often on the Internet and in the Usenet newsgroups are:

     GIF (Graphics Interchange Format) a rather old-fashioned but very
commonly found type of graphics file.  Almost any software can read this
format.  This is the most common format on Anonymous FTP archives.

     TIFF (Tagged Image File Format)  Technically more versatile than
GIF and just about as common.  A very good choice for exchanging files
between different programs.

     JPEG () A special compressed image format that is becoming common
in newer software.

     EPS (Encapsulated PostScript)  Not really a graphics file per say,
but a set of instructions for drawing an image.  The success of the
Postscript page description language for Laser printers has led to a new
stategy for including graphics in word processing files.  Many high end
word processing programs like Microsoft Word allow you to include a
reference to an external Postscript file containing the figure.

Desktop publishing and high-end word processing programs can often save
and import graphics in any of these formats, especially TIFF and EPS.

In addition, you may find files in proprietary formats like Macintosh
PICT files.  These formats serve as standards for their line of
computers but not across different brands.  Fortunately you can find
free software that will convert TIFF to PICT or _vice versa_.

  STEP 3.  Transmission to point of use

Suppose you have a graphics file or a word processing file containing
your brochure.  How do you send that file to someone?

If you work in an academic environment, it is quite possible that one or
the other institutions is an Anonymous FTP site.  You may be able to use
the Anon. FTP site as a "mailbox" to transfer the file in binary mode--
or you could exchange passwords and transfer the file directly, if both
have a direct connection to the Internet.

More commonly, you will have to send the file by E-mail.  Say you've
just finished a brochure and you want to send it cross-country.  Let's
suppose that your business has two branches--one in New York and one in
Los Angeles, and that both offices have Macintoshes with Microsoft Word
and that you both have one of the free "Usenet software kits" for the
Macintosh (not necessarily the same one).  Then, you proceed as follows:

  A.  Using UUENCODE (or BINHEX, if you like) you convert the Microsoft
Word file to a coded text file.

  B.  If your mail has a size limit, you may have to break up the file
and send it in parts.

  C.  At the receiving end, reassemble the file and strip any headers
and trailers added by the mail system.  The file should look like

     begin  <very first line>
     M
     M
     M


     M
     end  <very last line>

and be saved as a TEXT file.

  D.  Run UUDECODE (or BINHEX) and recover the binary file.

  E.  Run Microsoft Word, open the binary (MS Word!) file and print.

There may be one slight glitch.  Macintosh files have two parts, a
"resource" part and a "data" part.  The resource part contains such
information as the name of the application to run when you click on the
file and how to draw the cute little icon pictures.  Some of the simpler
programs do not encode the resource part so you may get a generic
document that you can't open by clicking on it (the infamous
"application busy or missing" message).  That's OK.  Open it from
*within* Word and then save it as a Word document.  It should recover
the missing parts.  And get smarter software.

Certainly this procedure is complicated--and you might want to do a dry
run before you try beating a 5 o'clock deadline--but the capability of
transfering a computer file cross-country in seconds can be crucial to a
business.  The fact that it can be done with free software and a casual
$10/month E-mail connection is astounding.  Play around and learn to do
this.  In the future, printers may commonly accept submissions by E-mail
or by direct transfer over telephone lines.  Imagine not having to
figure out how to keep your camera-ready copy dry on a rainy day or
having to rush across town minutes before your deadline!

  STEP 4.  Image enhancing and/or color separation

One of the great advantages of having a graphic in a computer file is
that you can use free software (or shareware) to play around with the
image.  Cropping, rotating, streching, zooming, and so on are all
common.  In addition, you can convert color to black and white or
greyscale, enhance the image, make halftones or color separations, and
even play with the spatial frequency spectrum if you want.  (Color
separations are the four images needed by printers--separate ones for
Cyan, Yellow, Magenta, and Black ink).

  STEP 5.  Importing or embedding in a word processing or desktop
publishing program

Once you are happy with the picture you import it as a graphic into your
DTP or word processing program.  If your program reads the format the
picture is in, this is easy.  If not, you will need to get free software
that converts from the format you have to the one you need.  This
process is very experimental.  I've found that I have better results
converting from an obscure format to a standard and common format like
GIF or TIFF before converting to a proprietary target format.  This is
even true if the software says it reads the obscure format directly.

  STEP 6.  Printing on a laser printer or other equipment

If a graphic is not solely intended for display on a (color) monitor,
like a slide presentation, it must be printed out.  And there it is.
Your picture in print.



<Chapter 8>  What to Do When You Only Have E-mail

The very first thing to do is to get information on getting a better
Internet connection!  But barring that, there are many reasons that you
might need to know workarounds that only require E-mail:  you might be
stuck somewhere (like work) where there is no Internet access, or you
could be borrowing access from a friend.  Since Internetworking is about
communicating with others, in many ways this is the most important
chapter in this course.

First we consider methods for


<Section 8.1>  FTP by Mail Servers


<Section 8.2>  Archie by Mail


<Section 8.3>  Mailservers and Fileservers


<Section 8.4>  Mailing lists and how to find them


<Section 8.5>  E-mail to FAX

Fax is not a useful as E-mail, except in regard to one thing.


<Section 8.6>  The Top Ten Fun Things to Get by E-mail List

Now that you know the techniques, try getting some of the things on the
"Top 10" list, in Appendix E.


<Chapter 9>  Employee Development:  How to Get Your Employees
Internetworking

This short Chapter contains a little advice on how to learn about the
Internet.  It should be clear from the preceding Chapters that learning
how to use the Internet is a survival skill for many businesses.
Effective use of the electronic medium

  o  Saves employee time--time lost in phone tag, lost messages, and
they three day time delay of surface mail.

  o  Avoids circuitous means of transfering data like printing a
document, faxing it, and then rekeyboarding the data at the receiving
end

  o  Allows businesses and individuals to self-publish, and distribute
their work efficiently, whether or not the text or the graphical
appearance is primary.

  o  Provides access to information, allows communication and
distribution of documents in a single, uniform fashion.

It should also be clear that Internetworking is not yet a smooth, easily
learned process.  It requires knowledge and skills that are not
presently taught anywhere except on the Internet itself.

The next section discusses specific needs of different segments of
people.  The final section contains a fairly systematic exposition of
the methods and skills needed to Internetwork effectively.  But far from
representing these sections as the last word on the subject, I would
like to stress that the only way to learn Internetworking is through
undirected exploration of the Internet.

This means you have to let your employees play, at least on their own
time:  play with programs, play with Anonymous FTP, and play with Usenet
news.  None of these activities are directly productive, but the playing
pays off when you need a new program and someone in your office can

     o  pick the right Usenet newsgroup and retrieve its FAQ

     o  read the FAQ and learn about free software that will solve your
problem and where to find the latest version

     o  connect to the software archive and (correctly) transfer the
program--even though the intervening machine is of the "wrong" make.

     o  properly decompress and install the software.

When all this is done competently, in less than half an hour, you will
have attained the goal of employee development.

A final caveat:  *don't neglect Usenet news.*  Usenet news is the most
difficult of the "Internet basic services" to get because it is not
really an Internet service.  It is commonly found on Internet computers
and commonly transmitted over the Internet, but it does not fit into the
E-mail-FTP-telnet scheme of things.  If your Internet provider does not
provide the news, you may have to ferret it out by (1) getting an
account on a public access UNIX system and (2) learning to use UNIX.
Command-line UNIX is no easier than command-line MS-DOS, but it is worth
learning how to get on a UNIX system for the "rn" (readnews) command
alone.  All you need to know to get that far (and more) is contained in
Appendix D.

Any guide like this will soon be dated in terms of information sources,
techniques, and software.  But Usenet is up to the minute.  There,
hidden among the many diversions of alt., talk., and soc. hierarchies,
is the latest information on the computing environment of modern
Internetworking.  In the opinion of this author, learning to use a
newsreader and reading the network news regularly is the *single most
important Internetworking skill*.  The Usenet newsgroups are Dewey
Decimal System of the the true world library.  Information can be found
in plenty elsewhere, but guides to information are rare and priceless--
and the Usenet news is the guide to the Internet.



<Part II>  Special Concerns

This Part lists briefly some of the ways in which various groups of
people can use internetworking skills.



<Chapter 11>  Special for Businesses

I wish I had better news for business use of the Internet.  I wish I
could describe hundreds of free services of interest to *business* and
tell you how to use the Internet for profit.  But it's not there yet.
However, before you turn away with a sad but knowing smile on your face
shaking your head over another unlikely technological dream--you've seen
it before--consider this:  the main potential of the Internet is as a
communication medium.  Is radio and television important to businesses?
What about newspapers and magazines?  Or direct mail?  Very few
businesses make money by selling newspapers or operating radio stations,
but many, many businesses use these media for advertising.  You and your
employees need to become adept at using this medium for the same reasons
you've mastered layout of newpaper ads and writing form letters.

It is very important to understand that the Internet is not a broadcast
medium but more like the telephone or mail system.  It specializes in
contacting individuals one at a time.  In other words, you are not going
to get a list of all 25 million E-mail addresses and bombard them every
10 minutes with a 30 second sound byte.  Nor are you going to send 100
people a letter asking them to contact 100 persons each.  On the other
hand you might use the medium to contact a mailing list of your
customers or self-publish a promotional brochure.

The amount of commercial traffic on the Internet is disappointingly
small--but important.  Mostly this is for historical reasons.  The
backbone network in the United States, NSFnet (for National Science
Foundation) has an "acceptable use" policy for traffic carried over it.
This restricts traffic to messages that support the R&D effort of
certain government laboratories and universities.  Clearly, there is
not room for commercial traffic if you are directly connected to the
NSFnet.

But nowadays one can get on the Internet without connecting directly to
NSFnet, and the amount of commercial traffic is growing.  Don't
overlook:

  o  Making product information and brochures available by E-mail as
well as by the postal service.

  o  Allowing customer-support inquiries by E-mail.

  o  Starting a mailing list for your customers or clients.

  o  Setting up a "mail-server" to let clients get information about
your product automatically, without having to wait for you to log on
(required direct connection to the Internet).

  o  Putting your product information on an anonymous FTP server
(requires that you have a fileserver on the net or find an FTP site
willing to take the information).

Suprisingly, there are, to my knowledge, no pay-for-advertising services
that support mailservers or anonymous FTP sites.  It is a fair
prediction that this advertising medium will develop as more persons
join the net.  You could put your information on bulletin boards, of
course, but only members will see it there--not the 25 million people
with E-mail access.

The fact remains, however, that unless you are in very specific
industries that are information or paper intensive (say publishing,
computing, information retrieval, and so on), or unless you need access
to government information like weather maps, that your use of the
Internet will consist of downloading programs or getting the latest
technical information.

All of this overlooks the most important aspect of the Internet for
businesses.  The Internet is evolving very rapidly.  It is likely to be
an important medium for transacting business, for customer service and
for advertising in the very near future no matter what industry you are
in.  For some industries, like publishing, high-technology industries,
and the media, it will be critical.  Businesses who have a pool of
employees that are adept at using the Internet will have a competitive
advantage over firms that don't.  Thus you should encourage your
employees to get personal Internet connections and learn about the
Internet after hours.



<Chapter 12>  Special for Students and their Parents

Since the Internet grew up in an academic environment, university
students will likely have a level of access that would be the envy of
any business.  All the services and research tools--not just E-mail,
FTP, and telnet, but gopher, WWW, WAIS, and the rest are likely to be
available to students from any terminal on the local "cluster" or by
dial-up from their dorm rooms.

Students will be especially keen on:

  o  checking the university library catalogue to see if a book is in
before walking to the library.

  o  finding out about campus events (even at other universities!)
through gopher or school bulletin boards

  o  posting buy and sell notices for computer equipment, cars, housing,
and so on.

  o  contacting potential tutors either at their own university or for
help by E-mail.  (A netwide "university" of tutors, called Usenet
University, is prepared to answer questions in various subjects by E-
mail already exists in the Usenet newsgroups.  See the alt.uu.*
hierarchy).

  o  using online catalogues of other university libraries to find books
for interlibrary loan or to compile bibliographies

  o  downloading free software and information

  o  finding scholarship information

Parents can communicate with their children at college by E-mail--and
probably get a faster response than waiting for the occasional letter
from home.  Worried parents will have to refrain,