The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Haunted Bookshop
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Haunted Bookshop

Author: Christopher Morley


        
Release date: October 1, 1994 [eBook #172]
                Most recently updated: January 1, 2021

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/172

Credits: Updates to this eBook were provided by Andrew Sly


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HAUNTED BOOKSHOP ***














Updates to this eBook were provided by Andrew Sly.





THE HAUNTED BOOKSHOP


BY

CHRISTOPHER MORLEY




TO THE BOOKSELLERS

Be pleased to know, most worthy, that this little book is dedicated to
you in affection and respect.

The faults of the composition are plain to you all.  I begin merely in
the hope of saying something further of the adventures of ROGER
MIFFLIN, whose exploits in "Parnassus on Wheels" some of you have been
kind enough to applaud.  But then came Miss Titania Chapman, and my
young advertising man fell in love with her, and the two of them rather
ran away with the tale.

I think I should explain that the passage in Chapter VIII, dealing with
the delightful talent of Mr. Sidney Drew, was written before the
lamented death of that charming artist.  But as it was a sincere
tribute, sincerely meant, I have seen no reason for removing it.

Chapters I, II, III, and VI appeared originally in The Bookman, and to
the editor of that admirable magazine I owe thanks for his permission
to reprint.

Now that Roger is to have ten Parnassuses on the road, I am emboldened
to think that some of you may encounter them on their travels.  And if
you do, I hope you will find that these new errants of the Parnassus on
Wheels Corporation are living up to the ancient and honourable
traditions of our noble profession.

CHRISTOPHER MORLEY.

Philadelphia,
  April 28, 1919




The Haunted Bookshop



Chapter I

The Haunted Bookshop


If you are ever in Brooklyn, that borough of superb sunsets and
magnificent vistas of husband-propelled baby-carriages, it is to be
hoped you may chance upon a quiet by-street where there is a very
remarkable bookshop.

This bookshop, which does business under the unusual name "Parnassus at
Home," is housed in one of the comfortable old brown-stone dwellings
which have been the joy of several generations of plumbers and
cockroaches.  The owner of the business has been at pains to remodel
the house to make it a more suitable shrine for his trade, which deals
entirely in second-hand volumes.  There is no second-hand bookshop in
the world more worthy of respect.

It was about six o'clock of a cold November evening, with gusts of rain
splattering upon the pavement, when a young man proceeded uncertainly
along Gissing Street, stopping now and then to look at shop windows as
though doubtful of his way.  At the warm and shining face of a French
rotisserie he halted to compare the number enamelled on the transom
with a memorandum in his hand.  Then he pushed on for a few minutes, at
last reaching the address he sought.  Over the entrance his eye was
caught by the sign:


                       PARNASSUS AT HOME
                       R. AND H. MIFFLIN
                      BOOKLOVERS WELCOME!
                     THIS SHOP IS HAUNTED


He stumbled down the three steps that led into the dwelling of the
muses, lowered his overcoat collar, and looked about.

It was very different from such bookstores as he had been accustomed to
patronize.  Two stories of the old house had been thrown into one: the
lower space was divided into little alcoves; above, a gallery ran round
the wall, which carried books to the ceiling.  The air was heavy with
the delightful fragrance of mellowed paper and leather surcharged with
a strong bouquet of tobacco.  In front of him he found a large placard
in a frame:


     THIS SHOP IS HAUNTED by the ghosts
     Of all great literature, in hosts;

     We sell no fakes or trashes.
     Lovers of books are welcome here,
     No clerks will babble in your ear,

     Please smoke--but don't drop ashes!
                             ----
     Browse as long as you like.
     Prices of all books plainly marked.
     If you want to ask questions, you'll find the proprietor
           where the tobacco smoke is thickest.
     We pay cash for books.
     We have what you want, though you may not know you want it.

          Malnutrition of the reading faculty is a serious thing.

     Let us prescribe for you.

     By R. & H. MIFFLIN,
                                     Proprs.


The shop had a warm and comfortable obscurity, a kind of drowsy dusk,
stabbed here and there by bright cones of yellow light from
green-shaded electrics.  There was an all-pervasive drift of tobacco
smoke, which eddied and fumed under the glass lamp shades.  Passing
down a narrow aisle between the alcoves the visitor noticed that some
of the compartments were wholly in darkness; in others where lamps were
glowing he could see a table and chairs.  In one corner, under a sign
lettered ESSAYS, an elderly gentleman was reading, with a face of
fanatical ecstasy illumined by the sharp glare of electricity; but
there was no wreath of smoke about him so the newcomer concluded he was
not the proprietor.

As the young man approached the back of the shop the general effect
became more and more fantastic.  On some skylight far overhead he could
hear the rain drumming; but otherwise the place was completely silent,
peopled only (so it seemed) by the gurgitating whorls of smoke and the
bright profile of the essay reader.  It seemed like a secret fane, some
shrine of curious rites, and the young man's throat was tightened by a
stricture which was half agitation and half tobacco.  Towering above
him into the gloom were shelves and shelves of books, darkling toward
the roof.  He saw a table with a cylinder of brown paper and twine,
evidently where purchases might be wrapped; but there was no sign of an
attendant.

"This place may indeed be haunted," he thought, "perhaps by the
delighted soul of Sir Walter Raleigh, patron of the weed, but seemingly
not by the proprietors."

His eyes, searching the blue and vaporous vistas of the shop, were
caught by a circle of brightness that shone with a curious egg-like
lustre.  It was round and white, gleaming in the sheen of a hanging
light, a bright island in a surf of tobacco smoke.  He came more close,
and found it was a bald head.

This head (he then saw) surmounted a small, sharp-eyed man who sat
tilted back in a swivel chair, in a corner which seemed the nerve
centre of the establishment.  The large pigeon-holed desk in front of
him was piled high with volumes of all sorts, with tins of tobacco and
newspaper clippings and letters.  An antiquated typewriter, looking
something like a harpsichord, was half-buried in sheets of manuscript.
The little bald-headed man was smoking a corn-cob pipe and reading a
cook-book.

"I beg your pardon," said the caller, pleasantly; "is this the
proprietor?"

Mr. Roger Mifflin, the proprietor of "Parnassus at Home," looked up,
and the visitor saw that he had keen blue eyes, a short red beard, and
a convincing air of competent originality.

"It is," said Mr. Mifflin.  "Anything I can do for you?"

"My name is Aubrey Gilbert," said the young man.  "I am representing
the Grey-Matter Advertising Agency.  I want to discuss with you the
advisability of your letting us handle your advertising account,
prepare snappy copy for you, and place it in large circulation mediums.
Now the war's over, you ought to prepare some constructive campaign for
bigger business."

The bookseller's face beamed.  He put down his cook-book, blew an
expanding gust of smoke, and looked up brightly.

"My dear chap," he said, "I don't do any advertising."

"Impossible!" cried the other, aghast as at some gratuitous indecency.

"Not in the sense you mean.  Such advertising as benefits me most is
done for me by the snappiest copywriters in the business."

"I suppose you refer to Whitewash and Gilt?" said Mr. Gilbert wistfully.

"Not at all.  The people who are doing my advertising are Stevenson,
Browning, Conrad and Company."

"Dear me," said the Grey-Matter solicitor.  "I don't know that agency
at all.  Still, I doubt if their copy has more pep than ours."

"I don't think you get me.  I mean that my advertising is done by the
books I sell.  If I sell a man a book by Stevenson or Conrad, a book
that delights or terrifies him, that man and that book become my living
advertisements."

"But that word-of-mouth advertising is exploded," said Gilbert.  "You
can't get Distribution that way.  You've got to keep your trademark
before the public."

"By the bones of Tauchnitz!" cried Mifflin.  "Look here, you wouldn't
go to a doctor, a medical specialist, and tell him he ought to
advertise in papers and magazines?  A doctor is advertised by the
bodies he cures.  My business is advertised by the minds I stimulate.
And let me tell you that the book business is different from other
trades.  People don't know they want books.  I can see just by looking
at you that your mind is ill for lack of books but you are blissfully
unaware of it!  People don't go to a bookseller until some serious
mental accident or disease makes them aware of their danger.  Then they
come here.  For me to advertise would be about as useful as telling
people who feel perfectly well that they ought to go to the doctor.  Do
you know why people are reading more books now than ever before?
Because the terrific catastrophe of the war has made them realize that
their minds are ill.  The world was suffering from all sorts of mental
fevers and aches and disorders, and never knew it.  Now our mental
pangs are only too manifest.  We are all reading, hungrily, hastily,
trying to find out--after the trouble is over--what was the matter with
our minds."

The little bookseller was standing up now, and his visitor watched him
with mingled amusement and alarm.

"You know," said Mifflin, "I am interested that you should have thought
it worth while to come in here.  It reinforces my conviction of the
amazing future ahead of the book business.  But I tell you that future
lies not merely in systematizing it as a trade.  It lies in dignifying
it as a profession.  It is small use to jeer at the public for craving
shoddy books, quack books, untrue books.  Physician, cure thyself!  Let
the bookseller learn to know and revere good books, he will teach the
customer.  The hunger for good books is more general and more insistent
than you would dream.  But it is still in a way subconscious.  People
need books, but they don't know they need them.  Generally they are not
aware that the books they need are in existence."

"Why wouldn't advertising be the way to let them know?" asked the young
man, rather acutely.

"My dear chap, I understand the value of advertising.  But in my own
case it would be futile.  I am not a dealer in merchandise but a
specialist in adjusting the book to the human need.  Between ourselves,
there is no such thing, abstractly, as a 'good' book.  A book is 'good'
only when it meets some human hunger or refutes some human error.  A
book that is good for me would very likely be punk for you.  My
pleasure is to prescribe books for such patients as drop in here and
are willing to tell me their symptoms.  Some people have let their
reading faculties decay so that all I can do is hold a post mortem on
them.  But most are still open to treatment.  There is no one so
grateful as the man to whom you have given just the book his soul
needed and he never knew it.  No advertisement on earth is as potent as
a grateful customer.

"I will tell you another reason why I don't advertise," he continued.
"In these days when everyone keeps his trademark before the public, as
you call it, not to advertise is the most original and startling thing
one can do to attract attention.  It was the fact that I do NOT
advertise that drew you here.  And everyone who comes here thinks he
has discovered the place himself.  He goes and tells his friends about
the book asylum run by a crank and a lunatic, and they come here in
turn to see what it is like."

"I should like to come here again myself and browse about," said the
advertising agent.  "I should like to have you prescribe for me."

"The first thing needed is to acquire a sense of pity.  The world has
been printing books for 450 years, and yet gunpowder still has a wider
circulation.  Never mind!  Printer's ink is the greater explosive: it
will win.  Yes, I have a few of the good books here.  There are only
about 30,000 really important books in the world.  I suppose about
5,000 of them were written in the English language, and 5,000 more have
been translated."

"You are open in the evenings?"

"Until ten o'clock.  A great many of my best customers are those who
are at work all day and can only visit bookshops at night.  The real
book-lovers, you know, are generally among the humbler classes.  A man
who is impassioned with books has little time or patience to grow rich
by concocting schemes for cozening his fellows."

The little bookseller's bald pate shone in the light of the bulb
hanging over the wrapping table.  His eyes were bright and earnest, his
short red beard bristled like wire.  He wore a ragged brown Norfolk
jacket from which two buttons were missing.

A bit of a fanatic himself, thought the customer, but a very
entertaining one.  "Well, sir," he said, "I am ever so grateful to you.
I'll come again.  Good-night."  And he started down the aisle for the
door.

As he neared the front of the shop, Mr. Mifflin switched on a cluster
of lights that hung high up, and the young man found himself beside a
large bulletin board covered with clippings, announcements, circulars,
and little notices written on cards in a small neat script.  The
following caught his eye:


RX

If your mind needs phosphorus, try "Trivia," by Logan Pearsall Smith.

If your mind needs a whiff of strong air, blue and cleansing, from
hilltops and primrose valleys, try "The Story of My Heart," by Richard
Jefferies.

If your mind needs a tonic of iron and wine, and a thorough
rough-and-tumbling, try Samuel Butler's "Notebooks" or "The Man Who Was
Thursday," by Chesterton.

If you need "all manner of Irish," and a relapse into irresponsible
freakishness, try "The Demi-Gods," by James Stephens.  It is a better
book than one deserves or expects.

It's a good thing to turn your mind upside down now and then, like an
hour-glass, to let the particles run the other way.

One who loves the English tongue can have a lot of fun with a Latin
dictionary.

                                           ROGER MIFFLIN.


Human beings pay very little attention to what is told them unless they
know something about it already.  The young man had heard of none of
these books prescribed by the practitioner of bibliotherapy.  He was
about to open the door when Mifflin appeared at his side.

"Look here," he said, with a quaint touch of embarrassment.  "I was
very much interested by our talk.  I'm all alone this evening--my wife
is away on a holiday.  Won't you stay and have supper with me?  I was
just looking up some new recipes when you came in."

The other was equally surprised and pleased by this unusual invitation.

"Why--that's very good of you," he said.  "Are you sure I won't be
intruding?"

"Not at all!" cried the bookseller.  "I detest eating alone: I was
hoping someone would drop in.  I always try to have a guest for supper
when my wife is away.  I have to stay at home, you see, to keep an eye
on the shop.  We have no servant, and I do the cooking myself.  It's
great fun.  Now you light your pipe and make yourself comfortable for a
few minutes while I get things ready.  Suppose you come back to my den."

On a table of books at the front of the shop Mifflin laid a large card
lettered:


     PROPRIETOR AT SUPPER
     IF YOU WANT ANYTHING
     RING THIS BELL


Beside the card he placed a large old-fashioned dinner bell, and then
led the way to the rear of the shop.

Behind the little office in which this unusual merchant had been
studying his cook-book a narrow stairway rose on each side, running up
to the gallery.  Behind these stairs a short flight of steps led to the
domestic recesses.  The visitor found himself ushered into a small room
on the left, where a grate of coals glowed under a dingy mantelpiece of
yellowish marble.  On the mantel stood a row of blackened corn-cob
pipes and a canister of tobacco.  Above was a startling canvas in
emphatic oils, representing a large blue wagon drawn by a stout white
animal--evidently a horse.  A background of lush scenery enhanced the
forceful technique of the limner.  The walls were stuffed with books.
Two shabby, comfortable chairs were drawn up to the iron fender, and a
mustard-coloured terrier was lying so close to the glow that a smell of
singed hair was sensible.

"There," said the host; "this is my cabinet, my chapel of ease.  Take
off your coat and sit down."

"Really," began Gilbert, "I'm afraid this is----"

"Nonsense!  Now you sit down and commend your soul to Providence and
the kitchen stove.  I'll bustle round and get supper." Gilbert pulled
out his pipe, and with a sense of elation prepared to enjoy an unusual
evening.  He was a young man of agreeable parts, amiable and sensitive.
He knew his disadvantages in literary conversation, for he had gone to
an excellent college where glee clubs and theatricals had left him
little time for reading.  But still he was a lover of good books,
though he knew them chiefly by hearsay.  He was twenty-five years old,
employed as a copywriter by the Grey-Matter Advertising Agency.

The little room in which he found himself was plainly the bookseller's
sanctum, and contained his own private library.  Gilbert browsed along
the shelves curiously.  The volumes were mostly shabby and bruised;
they had evidently been picked up one by one in the humble mangers of
the second-hand vendor.  They all showed marks of use and meditation.

Mr. Gilbert had the earnest mania for self-improvement which has
blighted the lives of so many young men--a passion which, however, is
commendable in those who feel themselves handicapped by a college
career and a jewelled fraternity emblem.  It suddenly struck him that
it would be valuable to make a list of some of the titles in Mifflin's
collection, as a suggestion for his own reading.  He took out a
memorandum book and began jotting down the books that intrigued him:



     The Works of Francis Thompson (3 vols.)
     Social History of Smoking:  Apperson
     The Path to Rome:  Hilaire Belloc
     The Book of Tea:  Kakuzo
     Happy Thoughts:  F. C. Burnand
     Dr. Johnson's Prayers and Meditations
     Margaret Ogilvy:  J. M. Barrie
     Confessions of a Thug:  Taylor
     General Catalogue of the Oxford University Press
     The Morning's War:  C. E. Montague
     The Spirit of Man:  edited by Robert Bridges
     The Romany Rye:  Borrow
     Poems:  Emily Dickinson
     Poems:  George Herbert
     The House of Cobwebs:  George Gissing


So far had he got, and was beginning to say to himself that in the
interests of Advertising (who is a jealous mistress) he had best call a
halt, when his host entered the room, his small face eager, his eyes
blue points of light.

"Come, Mr. Aubrey Gilbert!" he cried.  "The meal is set.  You want to
wash your hands?  Make haste then, this way: the eggs are hot and
waiting."

The dining-room into which the guest was conducted betrayed a feminine
touch not visible in the smoke-dimmed quarters of shop and cabinet.  At
the windows were curtains of laughing chintz and pots of pink geranium.
The table, under a drop-light in a flame-coloured silk screen, was
brightly set with silver and blue china.  In a cut-glass decanter
sparkled a ruddy brown wine.  The edged tool of Advertising felt his
spirits undergo an unmistakable upward pressure.

"Sit down, sir," said Mifflin, lifting the roof of a platter.  "These
are eggs Samuel Butler, an invention of my own, the apotheosis of hen
fruit."

Gilbert greeted the invention with applause.  An Egg Samuel Butler, for
the notebook of housewives, may be summarized as a pyramid, based upon
toast, whereof the chief masonries are a flake of bacon, an egg poached
to firmness, a wreath of mushrooms, a cap-sheaf of red peppers; the
whole dribbled with a warm pink sauce of which the inventor retains the
secret.  To this the bookseller chef added fried potatoes from another
dish, and poured for his guest a glass of wine.

"This is California catawba," said Mifflin, "in which the grape and the
sunshine very pleasantly (and cheaply) fulfil their allotted destiny.
I pledge you prosperity to the black art of Advertising!"

The psychology of the art and mystery of Advertising rests upon tact,
an instinctive perception of the tone and accent which will be en
rapport with the mood of the hearer.  Mr. Gilbert was aware of this,
and felt that quite possibly his host was prouder of his whimsical
avocation as gourmet than of his sacred profession as a bookman.

"Is it possible, sir," he began, in lucid Johnsonian, "that you can
concoct so delicious an entree in so few minutes?  You are not hoaxing
me?  There is no secret passage between Gissing Street and the
laboratories of the Ritz?"

"Ah, you should taste Mrs. Mifflin's cooking!" said the bookseller.  "I
am only an amateur, who dabbles in the craft during her absence.  She
is on a visit to her cousin in Boston.  She becomes, quite justifiably,
weary of the tobacco of this establishment, and once or twice a year it
does her good to breathe the pure serene of Beacon Hill.  During her
absence it is my privilege to inquire into the ritual of housekeeping.
I find it very sedative after the incessant excitement and speculation
of the shop."

"I should have thought," said Gilbert, "that life in a bookshop would
be delightfully tranquil."

"Far from it.  Living in a bookshop is like living in a warehouse of
explosives.  Those shelves are ranked with the most furious
combustibles in the world--the brains of men.  I can spend a rainy
afternoon reading, and my mind works itself up to such a passion and
anxiety over mortal problems as almost unmans me.  It is terribly
nerve-racking.  Surround a man with Carlyle, Emerson, Thoreau,
Chesterton, Shaw, Nietzsche, and George Ade--would you wonder at his
getting excited?  What would happen to a cat if she had to live in a
room tapestried with catnip?  She would go crazy!"

"Truly, I had never thought of that phase of bookselling," said the
young man.  "How is it, though, that libraries are shrines of such
austere calm?  If books are as provocative as you suggest, one would
expect every librarian to utter the shrill screams of a hierophant, to
clash ecstatic castanets in his silent alcoves!"

"Ah, my boy, you forget the card index!  Librarians invented that
soothing device for the febrifuge of their souls, just as I fall back
upon the rites of the kitchen.  Librarians would all go mad, those
capable of concentrated thought, if they did not have the cool and
healing card index as medicament!  Some more of the eggs?"

"Thank you," said Gilbert.  "Who was the butler whose name was
associated with the dish?"

"What?" cried Mifflin, in agitation, "you have not heard of Samuel
Butler, the author of The Way of All Flesh?  My dear young man, whoever
permits himself to die before he has read that book, and also Erewhon,
has deliberately forfeited his chances of paradise.  For paradise in
the world to come is uncertain, but there is indeed a heaven on this
earth, a heaven which we inhabit when we read a good book.  Pour
yourself another glass of wine, and permit me----"

(Here followed an enthusiastic development of the perverse philosophy
of Samuel Butler, which, in deference to my readers, I omit.  Mr.
Gilbert took notes of the conversation in his pocketbook, and I am
pleased to say that his heart was moved to a realization of his
iniquity, for he was observed at the Public Library a few days later
asking for a copy of The Way of All Flesh.  After inquiring at four
libraries, and finding all copies of the book in circulation, he was
compelled to buy one.  He never regretted doing so.)

"But I am forgetting my duties as host," said Mifflin.  "Our dessert
consists of apple sauce, gingerbread, and coffee." He rapidly cleared
the empty dishes from the table and brought on the second course.

"I have been noticing the warning over the sideboard," said Gilbert.
"I hope you will let me help you this evening?"  He pointed to a card
hanging near the kitchen door.  It read:


     ALWAYS WASH DISHES
     IMMEDIATELY AFTER MEALS
     IT SAVES TROUBLE


"I'm afraid I don't always obey that precept," said the bookseller as
he poured the coffee.  "Mrs. Mifflin hangs it there whenever she goes
away, to remind me.  But, as our friend Samuel Butler says, he that is
stupid in little will also be stupid in much.  I have a different
theory about dish-washing, and I please myself by indulging it.

"I used to regard dish-washing merely as an ignoble chore, a kind of
hateful discipline which had to be undergone with knitted brow and
brazen fortitude.  When my wife went away the first time, I erected a
reading stand and an electric light over the sink, and used to read
while my hands went automatically through base gestures of
purification.  I made the great spirits of literature partners of my
sorrow, and learned by heart a good deal of Paradise Lost and of Walt
Mason, while I soused and wallowed among pots and pans.  I used to
comfort myself with two lines of Keats:


     'The moving waters at their priest-like task
     Of pure ablution round earth's human shores----'


Then a new conception of the matter struck me.  It is intolerable for a
human being to go on doing any task as a penance, under duress.  No
matter what the work is, one must spiritualize it in some way, shatter
the old idea of it into bits and rebuild it nearer to the heart's
desire.  How was I to do this with dish-washing?

"I broke a good many plates while I was pondering over the matter.
Then it occurred to me that here was just the relaxation I needed.  I
had been worrying over the mental strain of being surrounded all day
long by vociferous books, crying out at me their conflicting views as
to the glories and agonies of life.  Why not make dish-washing my balm
and poultice?

"When one views a stubborn fact from a new angle, it is amazing how all
its contours and edges change shape!  Immediately my dishpan began to
glow with a kind of philosophic halo!  The warm, soapy water became a
sovereign medicine to retract hot blood from the head; the homely act
of washing and drying cups and saucers became a symbol of the order and
cleanliness that man imposes on the unruly world about him.  I tore
down my book rack and reading lamp from over the sink.

"Mr. Gilbert," he went on, "do not laugh at me when I tell you that I
have evolved a whole kitchen philosophy of my own.  I find the kitchen
the shrine of our civilization, the focus of all that is comely in
life.  The ruddy shine of the stove is as beautiful as any sunset.  A
well-polished jug or spoon is as fair, as complete and beautiful, as
any sonnet.  The dish mop, properly rinsed and wrung and hung outside
the back door to dry, is a whole sermon in itself.  The stars never
look so bright as they do from the kitchen door after the ice-box pan
is emptied and the whole place is 'redd up,' as the Scotch say."

"A very delightful philosophy indeed," said Gilbert.  "And now that we
have finished our meal, I insist upon your letting me give you a hand
with the washing up.  I am eager to test this dish-pantheism of yours!"

"My dear fellow," said Mifflin, laying a restraining hand on his
impetuous guest, "it is a poor philosophy that will not abide denial
now and then.  No, no--I did not ask you to spend the evening with me
to wash dishes."  And he led the way back to his sitting room.

"When I saw you come in," said Mifflin, "I was afraid you might be a
newspaper man, looking for an interview.  A young journalist came to
see us once, with very unhappy results.  He wheedled himself into Mrs.
Mifflin's good graces, and ended by putting us both into a book, called
Parnassus on Wheels, which has been rather a trial to me.  In that book
he attributes to me a number of shallow and sugary observations upon
bookselling that have been an annoyance to the trade.  I am happy to
say, though, that his book had only a trifling sale."

"I have never heard of it," said Gilbert.

"If you are really interested in bookselling you should come here some
evening to a meeting of the Corn Cob Club.  Once a month a number of
booksellers gather here and we discuss matters of bookish concern over
corn-cobs and cider.  We have all sorts and conditions of booksellers:
one is a fanatic on the subject of libraries.  He thinks that every
public library should be dynamited.  Another thinks that moving
pictures will destroy the book trade.  What rot!  Surely everything
that arouses people's minds, that makes them alert and questioning,
increases their appetite for books."

"The life of a bookseller is very demoralizing to the intellect," he
went on after a pause.  "He is surrounded by innumerable books; he
cannot possibly read them all; he dips into one and picks up a scrap
from another.  His mind gradually fills itself with miscellaneous
flotsam, with superficial opinions, with a thousand half-knowledges.
Almost unconsciously he begins to rate literature according to what
people ask for.  He begins to wonder whether Ralph Waldo Trine isn't
really greater than Ralph Waldo Emerson, whether J. M. Chapple isn't as
big a man as J. M. Barrie.  That way lies intellectual suicide.

"One thing, however, you must grant the good bookseller.  He is
tolerant.  He is patient of all ideas and theories.  Surrounded,
engulfed by the torrent of men's words, he is willing to listen to them
all.  Even to the publisher's salesman he turns an indulgent ear.  He
is willing to be humbugged for the weal of humanity.  He hopes
unceasingly for good books to be born.

"My business, you see, is different from most.  I only deal in
second-hand books; I only buy books that I consider have some honest
reason for existence.  In so far as human judgment can discern, I try
to keep trash out of my shelves.  A doctor doesn't traffic in quack
remedies.  I don't traffic in bogus books.

"A comical thing happened the other day.  There is a certain wealthy
man, a Mr. Chapman, who has long frequented this shop----"

"I wonder if that could be Mr. Chapman of the Chapman Daintybits
Company?" said Gilbert, feeling his feet touch familiar soil.

"The same, I believe," said Mifflin.  "Do you know him?"

"Ah," cried the young man with reverence.  "There is a man who can tell
you the virtues of advertising.  If he is interested in books, it is
advertising that made it possible.  We handle all his copy--I've
written a lot of it myself.  We have made the Chapman prunes a staple
of civilization and culture.  I myself devised that slogan 'We preen
ourselves on our prunes' which you see in every big magazine.  Chapman
prunes are known the world over.  The Mikado eats them once a week.
The Pope eats them.  Why, we have just heard that thirteen cases of
them are to be put on board the George Washington for the President's
voyage to the peace Conference.  The Czecho-Slovak armies were fed
largely on prunes.  It is our conviction in the office that our
campaign for the Chapman prunes did much to win the war."

"I read in an ad the other day--perhaps you wrote that, too?" said the
bookseller, "that the Elgin watch had won the war.  However, Mr.
Chapman has long been one of my best customers.  He heard about the
Corn Cob Club, and though of course he is not a bookseller he begged to
come to our meetings.  We were glad to have him do so, and he has
entered into our discussions with great zeal.  Often he has offered
many a shrewd comment.  He has grown so enthusiastic about the
bookseller's way of life that the other day he wrote to me about his
daughter (he is a widower).  She has been attending a fashionable
girls' school where, he says, they have filled her head with absurd,
wasteful, snobbish notions.  He says she has no more idea of the
usefulness and beauty of life than a Pomeranian dog.  Instead of
sending her to college, he has asked me if Mrs. Mifflin and I will take
her in here to learn to sell books.  He wants her to think she is
earning her keep, and is going to pay me privately for the privilege of
having her live here.  He thinks that being surrounded by books will
put some sense in her head.  I am rather nervous about the experiment,
but it is a compliment to the shop, isn't it?"

"Ye gods," cried Gilbert, "what advertising copy that would make!"

At this point the bell in the shop rang, and Mifflin jumped up.  "This
part of the evening is often rather busy," he said.  "I'm afraid I'll
have to go down on the floor.  Some of my habitues rather expect me to
be on hand to gossip about books."

"I can't tell you how much I've enjoyed myself," said Gilbert.  "I'm
going to come again and study your shelves."

"Well, keep it dark about the young lady," said the bookseller.  "I
don't want all you young blades dropping in here to unsettle her mind.
If she falls in love with anybody in this shop, it'll have to be Joseph
Conrad or John Keats!"

As he passed out, Gilbert saw Roger Mifflin engaged in argument with a
bearded man who looked like a college professor.  "Carlyle's Oliver
Cromwell?" he was saying.  "Yes, indeed!  Right over here!  Hullo,
that's odd!  It WAS here."



Chapter II

The Corn Cob Club[1]


[1] The latter half of this chapter may be omitted by all readers who
are not booksellers.


The Haunted Bookshop was a delightful place, especially of an evening,
when its drowsy alcoves were kindled with the brightness of lamps
shining on the rows of volumes.  Many a passer-by would stumble down
the steps from the street in sheer curiosity; others, familiar
visitors, dropped in with the same comfortable emotion that a man feels
on entering his club.  Roger's custom was to sit at his desk in the
rear, puffing his pipe and reading; though if any customer started a
conversation, the little man was quick and eager to carry it on.  The
lion of talk lay only sleeping in him; it was not hard to goad it up.

It may be remarked that all bookshops that are open in the evening are
busy in the after-supper hours.  Is it that the true book-lovers are
nocturnal gentry, only venturing forth when darkness and silence and
the gleam of hooded lights irresistibly suggest reading?  Certainly
night-time has a mystic affinity for literature, and it is strange that
the Esquimaux have created no great books.  Surely, for most of us, an
arctic night would be insupportable without O. Henry and Stevenson.
Or, as Roger Mifflin remarked during a passing enthusiasm for Ambrose
Bierce, the true noctes ambrosianae are the noctes ambrose bierceianae.

But Roger was prompt in closing Parnassus at ten o'clock.  At that hour
he and Bock (the mustard-coloured terrier, named for Boccaccio) would
make the round of the shop, see that everything was shipshape, empty
the ash trays provided for customers, lock the front door, and turn off
the lights.  Then they would retire to the den, where Mrs. Mifflin was
generally knitting or reading.  She would brew a pot of cocoa and they
would read or talk for half an hour or so before bed.  Sometimes Roger
would take a stroll along Gissing Street before turning in.  All day
spent with books has a rather exhausting effect on the mind, and he
used to enjoy the fresh air sweeping up the dark Brooklyn streets,
meditating some thought that had sprung from his reading, while Bock
sniffed and padded along in the manner of an elderly dog at night.

While Mrs. Mifflin was away, however, Roger's routine was somewhat
different.  After closing the shop he would return to his desk and with
a furtive, shamefaced air take out from a bottom drawer an untidy
folder of notes and manuscript.  This was the skeleton in his closet,
his secret sin.  It was the scaffolding of his book, which he had been
compiling for at least ten years, and to which he had tentatively
assigned such different titles as "Notes on Literature," "The Muse on
Crutches," "Books and I," and "What a Young Bookseller Ought to Know."
It had begun long ago, in the days of his odyssey as a rural book
huckster, under the title of "Literature Among the Farmers," but it had
branched out until it began to appear that (in bulk at least) Ridpath
would have to look to his linoleum laurels.  The manuscript in its
present state had neither beginning nor end, but it was growing
strenuously in the middle, and hundreds of pages were covered with
Roger's minute script.  The chapter on "Ars Bibliopolae," or the art of
bookselling, would be, he hoped, a classic among generations of book
vendors still unborn.  Seated at his disorderly desk, caressed by a
counterpane of drifting tobacco haze, he would pore over the
manuscript, crossing out, interpolating, re-arguing, and then referring
to volumes on his shelves.  Bock would snore under the chair, and soon
Roger's brain would begin to waver.  In the end he would fall asleep
over his papers, wake with a cramp about two o'clock, and creak
irritably to a lonely bed.

All this we mention only to explain how it was that Roger was dozing at
his desk about midnight, the evening after the call paid by Aubrey
Gilbert.  He was awakened by a draught of chill air passing like a
mountain brook over his bald pate.  Stiffly he sat up and looked about.
The shop was in darkness save for the bright electric over his head.
Bock, of more regular habit than his master, had gone back to his couch
in the kitchen, made of a packing case that had once coffined a set of
the Encyclopaedia Britannica.

"That's funny," said Roger to himself.  "Surely I locked the door?" He
walked to the front of the shop, switching on the cluster of lights
that hung from the ceiling.  The door was ajar, but everything else
seemed as usual.  Bock, hearing his footsteps, came trotting out from
the kitchen, his claws rattling on the bare wooden floor.  He looked up
with the patient inquiry of a dog accustomed to the eccentricities of
his patron.

"I guess I'm getting absent-minded," said Roger.  "I must have left the
door open."  He closed and locked it.  Then he noticed that the terrier
was sniffing in the History alcove, which was at the front of the shop
on the left-hand side.

"What is it, old man?" said Roger.  "Want something to read in bed?" He
turned on the light in that alcove.  Everything appeared normal.  Then
he noticed a book that projected an inch or so beyond the even line of
bindings.  It was a fad of Roger's to keep all his books in a flat row
on the shelves, and almost every evening at closing time he used to run
his palm along the backs of the volumes to level any irregularities
left by careless browsers.  He put out a hand to push the book into
place.  Then he stopped.

"Queer again," he thought.  "Carlyle's Oliver Cromwell!  I looked for
that book last night and couldn't find it.  When that professor fellow
was here.  Maybe I'm tired and can't see straight.  I'll go to bed."


The next day was a date of some moment.  Not only was it Thanksgiving
Day, with the November meeting of the Corn Cob Club scheduled for that
evening, but Mrs. Mifflin had promised to get home from Boston in time
to bake a chocolate cake for the booksellers.  It was said that some of
the members of the club were faithful in attendance more by reason of
Mrs. Mifflin's chocolate cake, and the cask of cider that her brother
Andrew McGill sent down from the Sabine Farm every autumn, than on
account of the bookish conversation.

Roger spent the morning in doing a little housecleaning, in preparation
for his wife's return.  He was a trifle abashed to find how many
mingled crumbs and tobacco cinders had accumulated on the dining-room
rug.  He cooked himself a modest lunch of lamb chops and baked
potatoes, and was pleased by an epigram concerning food that came into
his mind.  "It's not the food you dream about that matters," he said to
himself; "it's the vittles that walk right in and become a member of
the family." He felt that this needed a little polishing and
rephrasing, but that there was a germ of wit in it.  He had a habit of
encountering ideas at his solitary meals.

After this, he was busy at the sink scrubbing the dishes, when he was
surprised by feeling two very competent arms surround him, and a pink
gingham apron was thrown over his head.  "Mifflin," said his wife, "how
many times have I told you to put on an apron when you wash up!"

They greeted each other with the hearty, affectionate simplicity of
those congenially wedded in middle age.  Helen Mifflin was a buxom,
healthy creature, rich in good sense and good humour, well nourished
both in mind and body.  She kissed Roger's bald head, tied the apron
around his shrimpish person, and sat down on a kitchen chair to watch
him finish wiping the china.  Her cheeks were cool and ruddy from the
keen air, her face lit with the tranquil satisfaction of those who have
sojourned in the comfortable city of Boston.

"Well, my dear," said Roger, "this makes it a real Thanksgiving.  You
look as plump and full of matter as The Home Book of Verse."

"I've had a stunning time," she said, patting Bock who stood at her
knee, imbibing the familiar and mysterious fragrance by which dogs
identify their human friends.  "I haven't even heard of a book for
three weeks.  I did stop in at the Old Angle Book Shop yesterday, just
to say hullo to Joe Jillings.  He says all booksellers are crazy, but
that you are the craziest of the lot.  He wants to know if you're
bankrupt yet."

Roger's slate-blue eyes twinkled.  He hung up a cup in the china closet
and lit his pipe before replying.

"What did you say?"

"I said that our shop was haunted, and mustn't be supposed to come
under the usual conditions of the trade."

"Bully for you!  And what did Joe say to that?"

"'Haunted by the nuts!'"

"Well," said Roger, "when literature goes bankrupt I'm willing to go
with it.  Not till then.  But by the way, we're going to be haunted by
a beauteous damsel pretty soon.  You remember my telling you that Mr.
Chapman wants to send his daughter to work in the shop?  Well, here's a
letter I had from him this morning."

He rummaged in his pocket, and produced the following, which Mrs.
Mifflin read:


DEAR MR.  MIFFLIN,

I am so delighted that you and Mrs. Mifflin are willing to try the
experiment of taking my daughter as an apprentice.  Titania is really a
very charming girl, and if only we can get some of the "finishing
school" nonsense out of her head she will make a fine woman.  She has
had (it was my fault, not hers) the disadvantage of being brought up,
or rather brought down, by having every possible want and whim
gratified.  Out of kindness for herself and her future husband, if she
should have one, I want her to learn a little about earning a living.
She is nearly nineteen, and I told her if she would try the bookshop
job for a while I would take her to Europe for a year afterward.

As I explained to you, I want her to think she is really earning her
way.  Of course I don't want the routine to be too hard for her, but I
do want her to get some idea of what it means to face life on one's
own.  If you will pay her ten dollars a week as a beginner, and deduct
her board from that, I will pay you twenty dollars a week, privately,
for your responsibility in caring for her and keeping your and Mrs.
Mifflin's friendly eyes on her.  I'm coming round to the Corn Cob
meeting to-morrow night, and we can make the final arrangements.

Luckily, she is very fond of books, and I really think she is looking
forward to the adventure with much anticipation.  I overheard her
saying to one of her friends yesterday that she was going to do some
"literary work" this winter.  That's the kind of nonsense I want her to
outgrow.  When I hear her say that she's got a job in a bookstore, I'll
know she's cured.

                                   Cordially yours,
                                         GEORGE CHAPMAN.


"Well?" said Roger, as Mrs. Mifflin made no comment.  "Don't you think
it will be rather interesting to get a naive young girl's reactions
toward the problems of our tranquil existence?"

"Roger, you blessed innocent!" cried his wife.  "Life will no longer be
tranquil with a girl of nineteen round the place.  You may fool
yourself, but you can't fool me.  A girl of nineteen doesn't REACT
toward things.  She explodes.  Things don't 'react' anywhere but in
Boston and in chemical laboratories.  I suppose you know you're taking
a human bombshell into the arsenal?"

Roger looked dubious.  "I remember something in Weir of Hermiston about
a girl being 'an explosive engine,'" he said.  "But I don't see that
she can do any very great harm round here.  We're both pretty well
proof against shell shock.  The worst that could happen would be if she
got hold of my private copy of Fireside Conversation in the Age of
Queen Elizabeth.  Remind me to lock it up somewhere, will you?"

This secret masterpiece by Mark Twain was one of the bookseller's
treasures.  Not even Helen had ever been permitted to read it; and she
had shrewdly judged that it was not in her line, for though she knew
perfectly well where he kept it (together with his life insurance
policy, some Liberty Bonds, an autograph letter from Charles Spencer
Chaplin, and a snapshot of herself taken on their honeymoon) she had
never made any attempt to examine it.

"Well," said Helen; "Titania or no Titania, if the Corn Cobs want their
chocolate cake to-night, I must get busy.  Take my suitcase upstairs
like a good fellow."


A gathering of booksellers is a pleasant sanhedrim to attend.  The
members of this ancient craft bear mannerisms and earmarks just as
definitely recognizable as those of the cloak and suit business or any
other trade.  They are likely to be a little--shall we say--worn at the
bindings, as becomes men who have forsaken worldly profit to pursue a
noble calling ill rewarded in cash.  They are possibly a trifle
embittered, which is an excellent demeanour for mankind in the face of
inscrutable heaven.  Long experience with publishers' salesmen makes
them suspicious of books praised between the courses of a heavy meal.

When a publisher's salesman takes you out to dinner, it is not
surprising if the conversation turns toward literature about the time
the last of the peas are being harried about the plate.  But, as Jerry
Gladfist says (he runs a shop up on Thirty-Eighth Street) the
publishers' salesmen supply a long-felt want, for they do now and then
buy one a dinner the like of which no bookseller would otherwise be
likely to commit.

"Well, gentlemen," said Roger as his guests assembled in his little
cabinet, "it's a cold evening.  Pull up toward the fire.  Make free
with the cider.  The cake's on the table.  My wife came back from
Boston specially to make it."

"Here's Mrs. Mifflin's health!" said Mr. Chapman, a quiet little man
who had a habit of listening to what he heard.  "I hope she doesn't
mind keeping the shop while we celebrate?"

"Not a bit," said Roger.  "She enjoys it."

"I see Tarzan of the Apes is running at the Gissing Street movie
palace," said Gladfist.  "Great stuff.  Have you seen it?"

"Not while I can still read The Jungle Book," said Roger.

"You make me tired with that talk about literature," cried Jerry.  "A
book's a book, even if Harold Bell Wright wrote it."

"A book's a book if you enjoy reading it," amended Meredith, from a big
Fifth Avenue bookstore.  "Lots of people enjoy Harold Bell Wright just
as lots of people enjoy tripe.  Either of them would kill me.  But
let's be tolerant."

"Your argument is a whole succession of non sequiturs," said Jerry,
stimulated by the cider to unusual brilliance.

"That's a long putt," chuckled Benson, the dealer in rare books and
first editions.

"What I mean is this," said Jerry.  "We aren't literary critics.  It's
none of our business to say what's good and what isn't.  Our job is
simply to supply the public with the books it wants when it wants them.
How it comes to want the books it does is no concern of ours."

"You're the guy that calls bookselling the worst business in the
world," said Roger warmly, "and you're the kind of guy that makes it
so.  I suppose you would say that it is no concern of the bookseller to
try to increase the public appetite for books?"

"Appetite is too strong a word," said Jerry.  "As far as books are
concerned the public is barely able to sit up and take a little liquid
nourishment.  Solid foods don't interest it.  If you try to cram roast
beef down the gullet of an invalid you'll kill him.  Let the public
alone, and thank God when it comes round to amputate any of its
hard-earned cash."

"Well, take it on the lowest basis," said Roger.  "I haven't any facts
to go upon----"

"You never have," interjected Jerry.

"But I'd like to bet that the Trade has made more money out of Bryce's
American Commonwealth than it ever did out of all Parson Wright's books
put together."

"What of it?  Why shouldn't they make both?"

This preliminary tilt was interrupted by the arrival of two more
visitors, and Roger handed round mugs of cider, pointed to the cake and
the basket of pretzels, and lit his corn-cob pipe.  The new arrivals
were Quincy and Fruehling; the former a clerk in the book department of
a vast drygoods store, the latter the owner of a bookshop in the Hebrew
quarter of Grand Street--one of the best-stocked shops in the city,
though little known to uptown book-lovers.

"Well," said Fruehling, his bright dark eyes sparkling above richly
tinted cheek-bones and bushy beard, "what's the argument?"

"The usual one," said Gladfist, grinning, "Mifflin confusing
merchandise with metaphysics."

MIFFLIN--Not at all.  I am simply saying that it is good business to
sell only the best.

GLADFIST--Wrong again.  You must select your stock according to your
customers.  Ask Quincy here.  Would there be any sense in his loading
up his shelves with Maeterlinck and Shaw when the department-store
trade wants Eleanor Porter and the Tarzan stuff?  Does a country grocer
carry the same cigars that are listed on the wine card of a Fifth
Avenue hotel?  Of course not.  He gets in the cigars that his trade
enjoys and is accustomed to.  Bookselling must obey the ordinary rules
of commerce.

MIFFLIN--A fig for the ordinary rules of commerce!  I came over here to
Gissing Street to get away from them.  My mind would blow out its fuses
if I had to abide by the dirty little considerations of supply and
demand.  As far as I am concerned, supply CREATES demand.

GLADFIST--Still, old chap, you have to abide by the dirty little
consideration of earning a living, unless someone has endowed you?

BENSON--Of course my line of business isn't strictly the same as you
fellows'.  But a thought that has often occurred to me in selling rare
editions may interest you.  The customer's willingness to part with his
money is usually in inverse ratio to the permanent benefit he expects
to derive from what he purchases.

MEREDITH--Sounds a bit like John Stuart Mill.

BENSON--Even so, it may be true.  Folks will pay a darned sight more to
be amused than they will to be exalted.  Look at the way a man shells
out five bones for a couple of theatre seats, or spends a couple of
dollars a week on cigars without thinking of it.  Yet two dollars or
five dollars for a book costs him positive anguish.  The mistake you
fellows in the retail trade have made is in trying to persuade your
customers that books are necessities.  Tell them they're luxuries.
That'll get them!  People have to work so hard in this life they're shy
of necessities.  A man will go on wearing a suit until it's threadbare,
much sooner than smoke a threadbare cigar.

GLADFIST--Not a bad thought.  You know, Mifflin here calls me a
material-minded cynic, but by thunder, I think I'm more idealistic than
he is.  I'm no propagandist incessantly trying to cajole poor innocent
customers into buying the kind of book _I_ think they ought to buy.
When I see the helpless pathos of most of them, who drift into a
bookstore without the slightest idea of what they want or what is worth
reading, I would disdain to take advantage of their frailty.  They are
absolutely at the mercy of the salesman.  They will buy whatever he
tells them to.  Now the honourable man, the high-minded man (by which I
mean myself) is too proud to ram some shimmering stuff at them just
because he thinks they ought to read it.  Let the boobs blunder around
and grab what they can.  Let natural selection operate.  I think it is
fascinating to watch them, to see their helpless groping, and to study
the weird ways in which they make their choice.  Usually they will buy
a book either because they think the jacket is attractive, or because
it costs a dollar and a quarter instead of a dollar and a half, or
because they say they saw a review of it.  The "review" usually turns
out to be an ad.  I don't think one book-buyer in a thousand knows the
difference.

MIFFLIN--Your doctrine is pitiless, base, and false!  What would you
think of a physician who saw men suffering from a curable disease and
did nothing to alleviate their sufferings?

GLADFIST--Their sufferings (as you call them) are nothing to what mine
would be if I stocked up with a lot of books that no one but highbrows
would buy.  What would you think of a base public that would go past my
shop day after day and let the high-minded occupant die of starvation?

MIFFLIN--Your ailment, Jerry, is that you conceive yourself as merely a
tradesman.  What I'm telling you is that the bookseller is a public
servant.  He ought to be pensioned by the state.  The honour of his
profession should compel him to do all he can to spread the
distribution of good stuff.

QUINCY--I think you forget how much we who deal chiefly in new books
are at the mercy of the publishers.  We have to stock the new stuff, a
large proportion of which is always punk.  Why it is punk, goodness
knows, because most of the bum books don't sell.

MIFFLIN--Ah, that is a mystery indeed!  But I can give you a fair
reason.  First, because there isn't enough good stuff to go round.
Second, because of the ignorance of the publishers, many of whom
honestly don't know a good book when they see it.  It is a matter of
sheer heedlessness in the selection of what they intend to publish.  A
big drug factory or a manufacturer of a well-known jam spends vast sums
of money on chemically assaying and analyzing the ingredients that are
to go into his medicines or in gathering and selecting the fruit that
is to be stewed into jam.  And yet they tell me that the most important
department of a publishing business, which is the gathering and
sampling of manuscripts, is the least considered and the least
remunerated.  I knew a reader for one publishing house:  he was a babe
recently out of college who didn't know a book from a frat pin.  If a
jam factory employs a trained chemist, why isn't it worth a publisher's
while to employ an expert book analyzer?  There are some of them.  Look
at the fellow who runs the Pacific Monthly's book business for example!
He knows a thing or two.

CHAPMAN--I think perhaps you exaggerate the value of those trained
experts.  They are likely to be fourflushers.  We had one once at our
factory, and as far as I could make out he never thought we were doing
good business except when we were losing money.

MIFFLIN--As far as I have been able to observe, making money is the
easiest thing in the world.  All you have to do is to turn out an
honest product, something that the public needs.  Then you have to let
them know that you have it, and teach them that they need it.  They
will batter down your front door in their eagerness to get it.  But if
you begin to hand them gold bricks, if you begin to sell them books
built like an apartment house, all marble front and all brick behind,
you're cutting your own throat, or rather cutting your own pocket,
which is the same thing.

MEREDITH--I think Mifflin's right.  You know the kind of place our shop
is:  a regular Fifth Avenue store, all plate glass front and marble
columns glowing in the indirect lighting like a birchwood at full moon.
We sell hundreds of dollars' worth of bunkum every day because people
ask for it; but I tell you we do it with reluctance.  It's rather the
custom in our shop to scoff at the book-buying public and call them
boobs, but they really want good books--the poor souls don't know how
to get them.  Still, Jerry has a certain grain of truth to his credit.
I get ten times more satisfaction in selling a copy of Newton's The
Amenities of Book-Collecting than I do in selling a copy of--well,
Tarzan; but it's poor business to impose your own private tastes on
your customers.  All you can do is to hint them along tactfully, when
you get a chance, toward the stuff that counts.

QUINCY--You remind me of something that happened in our book department
the other day.  A flapper came in and said she had forgotten the name
of the book she wanted, but it was something about a young man who had
been brought up by the monks.  I was stumped.  I tried her with The
Cloister and the Hearth and Monastery Bells and Legends of the Monastic
Orders and so on, but her face was blank.  Then one of the salesgirls
overheard us talking, and she guessed it right off the bat.  Of course
it was Tarzan.

MIFFLIN--You poor simp, there was your chance to introduce her to
Mowgli and the bandar-log.

QUINCY--True--I didn't think of it.

MIFFLIN--I'd like to get you fellows' ideas about advertising.  There
was a young chap in here the other day from an advertising agency,
trying to get me to put some copy in the papers.  Have you found that
it pays?

FRUEHLING--It always pays--somebody.  The only question is, does it pay
the man who pays for the ad?

MEREDITH--What do you mean?

FRUEHLING--Did you ever consider the problem of what I call tangential
advertising?  By that I mean advertising that benefits your rival
rather than yourself?  Take an example.  On Sixth Avenue there is a
lovely delicatessen shop, but rather expensive.  Every conceivable kind
of sweetmeat and relish is displayed in the brightly lit window.  When
you look at that window it simply makes your mouth water.  You decide
to have something to eat.  But do you get it there?  Not much!  You go
a little farther down the street and get it at the Automat or the
Crystal Lunch.  The delicatessen fellow pays the overhead expense of
that beautiful food exhibit, and the other man gets the benefit of it.
It's the same way in my business.  I'm in a factory district, where
people can't afford to have any but the best books.  (Meredith will
bear me out in saying that only the wealthy can afford the poor ones.)
They read the book ads in the papers and magazines, the ads of
Meredith's shop and others, and then they come to me to buy them.  I
believe in advertising, but I believe in letting someone else pay for
it.

MIFFLIN--I guess perhaps I can afford to go on riding on Meredith's
ads.  I hadn't thought of that.  But I think I shall put a little
notice in one of the papers some day, just a little card saying


                         PARNASSUS AT HOME
                         GOOD BOOKS BOUGHT
                             AND SOLD
                       THIS SHOP IS HAUNTED


It will be fun to see what come-back I get.

QUINCY--The book section of a department store doesn't get much chance
to enjoy that tangential advertising, as Fruehling calls it.  Why, when
our interior decorating shark puts a few volumes of a pirated Kipling
bound in crushed oilcloth or a copy of "Knock-kneed Stories," into the
window to show off a Louis XVIII boudoir suite, display space is
charged up against my department!  Last summer he asked me for
"something by that Ring fellow, I forget the name," to put a punchy
finish on a layout of porch furniture.  I thought perhaps he meant
Wagner's Nibelungen operas, and began to dig them out.  Then I found he
meant Ring Lardner.

GLADFIST--There you are.  I keep telling you bookselling is an
impossible job for a man who loves literature.  When did a bookseller
ever make any real contribution to the world's happiness?

MIFFLIN--Dr. Johnson's father was a bookseller.

GLADFIST--Yes, and couldn't afford to pay for Sam's education.

FRUEHLING--There's another kind of tangential advertising that
interests me.  Take, for instance, a Coles Phillips painting for some
brand of silk stockings.  Of course the high lights of the picture are
cunningly focussed on the stockings of the eminently beautiful lady;
but there is always something else in the picture--an automobile or a
country house or a Morris chair or a parasol--which makes it just as
effective an ad for those goods as it is for the stockings.  Every now
and then Phillips sticks a book into his paintings, and I expect the
Fifth Avenue book trade benefits by it.  A book that fits the mind as
well as a silk stocking does the ankle will be sure to sell.

MIFFLIN--You are all crass materialists.  I tell you, books are the
depositories of the human spirit, which is the only thing in this world
that endures.  What was it Shakespeare said--


     Not marble nor the gilded monuments
     Of princes shall outlive this powerful rhyme--


By the bones of the Hohenzollerns, he was right!  And wait a minute!
There's something in Carlyle's Cromwell that comes back to me.

He ran excitedly out of the room, and the members of the Corn Cob
fraternity grinned at each other.  Gladfist cleaned his pipe and poured
out some more cider.  "He's off on his hobby," he chuckled.  "I love
baiting him."

"Speaking of Carlyle's Cromwell," said Fruehling, "that's a book I
don't often hear asked for.  But a fellow came in the other day hunting
for a copy, and to my chagrin I didn't have one.  I rather pride myself
on keeping that sort of thing in stock.  So I called up Brentano's to
see if I could pick one up, and they told me they had just sold the
only copy they had.  Somebody must have been boosting Thomas!  Maybe
he's quoted in Tarzan, or somebody has bought up the film rights."

Mifflin came in, looking rather annoyed.

"Here's an odd thing," he said.  "I know damn well that copy of
Cromwell was on the shelf because I saw it there last night.  It's not
there now."

"That's nothing," said Quincy.  "You know how people come into a
second-hand store, see a book they take a fancy to but don't feel like
buying just then, and tuck it away out of sight or on some other shelf
where they think no one else will spot it, but they'll be able to find
it when they can afford it.  Probably someone's done that with your
Cromwell."

"Maybe, but I doubt it," said Mifflin.  "Mrs. Mifflin says she didn't
sell it this evening.  I woke her up to ask her.  She was dozing over
her knitting at the desk.  I guess she's tired after her trip."

"I'm sorry to miss the Carlyle quotation," said Benson.  "What was the
gist?"

"I think I've got it jotted down in a notebook," said Roger, hunting
along a shelf.  "Yes, here it is."  He read aloud:


"The works of a man, bury them under what guano-mountains and obscene
owl-droppings you will, do not perish, cannot perish.  What of Heroism,
what of Eternal Light was in a Man and his Life, is with very great
exactness added to the Eternities, remains forever a new divine portion
of the Sum of Things.


"Now, my friends, the bookseller is one of the keys in that universal
adding machine, because he aids in the cross-fertilization of men and
books.  His delight in his calling doesn't need to be stimulated even
by the bright shanks of a Coles Phillips picture.

"Roger, my boy," said Gladfist, "your innocent enthusiasm makes me
think of Tom Daly's favourite story about the Irish priest who was
rebuking his flock for their love of whisky.  'Whisky,' he said, 'is
the bane of this congregation.  Whisky, that steals away a man's
brains.  Whisky, that makes you shoot at landlords--and not hit them!'
Even so, my dear Roger, your enthusiasm makes you shoot at truth and
never come anywhere near it."

"Jerry," said Roger, "you are a upas tree.  Your shadow is poisonous!"

"Well, gentlemen," said Mr. Chapman, "I know Mrs. Mifflin wants to be
relieved of her post.  I vote we adjourn early.  Your conversation is
always delightful, though I am sometimes a bit uncertain as to the
conclusions.  My daughter is going to be a bookseller, and I shall look
forward to hearing her views on the business."

As the guests made their way out through the shop, Mr. Chapman drew
Roger aside.  "It's perfectly all right about sending Titania?" he
asked.

"Absolutely," said Roger.  "When does she want to come?"

"Is to-morrow too soon?"

"The sooner the better.  We've got a little spare room upstairs that
she can have.  I've got some ideas of my own about furnishing it for
her.  Send her round to-morrow afternoon."



Chapter III

Titania Arrives


The first pipe after breakfast is a rite of some importance to seasoned
smokers, and Roger applied the flame to the bowl as he stood at the
bottom of the stairs.  He blew a great gush of strong blue reek that
eddied behind him as he ran up the flight, his mind eagerly meditating
the congenial task of arranging the little spare room for the coming
employee.  Then, at the top of the steps, he found that his pipe had
already gone out.  "What with filling my pipe and emptying it, lighting
it and relighting it," he thought, "I don't seem to get much time for
the serious concerns of life.  Come to think of it, smoking, soiling
dishes and washing them, talking and listening to other people talk,
take up most of life anyway."

This theory rather pleased him, so he ran downstairs again to tell it
to Mrs. Mifflin.

"Go along and get that room fixed up," she said, "and don't try to palm
off any bogus doctrines on me so early in the morning.  Housewives have
no time for philosophy after breakfast."

Roger thoroughly enjoyed himself in the task of preparing the
guest-room for the new assistant.  It was a small chamber at the back
of the second storey, opening on to a narrow passage that connected
through a door with the gallery of the bookshop.  Two small windows
commanded a view of the modest roofs of that quarter of Brooklyn, roofs
that conceal so many brave hearts, so many baby carriages, so many cups
of bad coffee, and so many cartons of the Chapman prunes.

"By the way," he called downstairs, "better have some of the prunes for
supper to-night, just as a compliment to Miss Chapman."

Mrs. Mifflin preserved a humorous silence.

Over these noncommittal summits the bright eye of the bookseller, as he
tacked up the freshly ironed muslin curtains Mrs. Mifflin had allotted,
could discern a glimpse of the bay and the leviathan ferries that link
Staten Island with civilization.  "Just a touch of romance in the
outlook," he thought to himself.  "It will suffice to keep a blasee
young girl aware of the excitements of existence."

The room, as might be expected in a house presided over by Helen
Mifflin, was in perfect order to receive any occupant, but Roger had
volunteered to psychologize it in such a fashion as (he thought) would
convey favourable influences to the misguided young spirit that was to
be its tenant.  Incurable idealist, he had taken quite gravely his
responsibility as landlord and employer of Mr. Chapman's daughter.  No
chambered nautilus was to have better opportunity to expand the tender
mansions of its soul.

Beside the bed was a bookshelf with a reading lamp.  The problem Roger
was discussing was what books and pictures might be the best preachers
to this congregation of one.  To Mrs. Mifflin's secret amusement he had
taken down the picture of Sir Galahad which he had once hung there,
because (as he had said) if Sir Galahad were living to-day he would be
a bookseller.  "We don't want her feasting her imagination on young
Galahads," he had remarked at breakfast.  "That way lies premature
matrimony.  What I want to do is put up in her room one or two good
prints representing actual men who were so delightful in their day that
all the young men she is likely to see now will seem tepid and
prehensile.  Thus she will become disgusted with the present generation
of youths and there will be some chance of her really putting her mind
on the book business."

Accordingly he had spent some time in going through a bin where he kept
photos and drawings of authors that the publishers' "publicity men"
were always showering upon him.  After some thought he discarded
promising engravings of Harold Bell Wright and Stephen Leacock, and
chose pictures of Shelley, Anthony Trollope, Robert Louis Stevenson,
and Robert Burns.  Then, after further meditation, he decided that
neither Shelley nor Burns would quite do for a young girl's room, and
set them aside in favour of a portrait of Samuel Butler.  To these he
added a framed text that he was very fond of and had hung over his own
desk.  He had once clipped it from a copy of Life and found much
pleasure in it.  It runs thus:


                    ON THE RETURN OF A BOOK
                       LENT TO A FRIEND


I GIVE humble and hearty thanks for the safe return of this book which
having endured the perils of my friend's bookcase, and the bookcases of
my friend's friends, now returns to me in reasonably good condition.

I GIVE humble and hearty thanks that my friend did not see fit to give
this book to his infant as a plaything, nor use it as an ash-tray for
his burning cigar, nor as a teething-ring for his mastiff.

WHEN I lent this book I deemed it as lost:  I was resigned to the
bitterness of the long parting:  I never thought to look upon its pages
again.

BUT NOW that my book is come back to me, I rejoice and am exceeding
glad!  Bring hither the fatted morocco and let us rebind the volume and
set it on the shelf of honour:  for this my book was lent, and is
returned again.

PRESENTLY, therefore, I may return some of the books that I myself have
borrowed.


"There!" he thought.  "That will convey to her the first element of
book morality."

These decorations having been displayed on the walls, he bethought
himself of the books that should stand on the bedside shelf.

This is a question that admits of the utmost nicety of discussion.
Some authorities hold that the proper books for a guest-room are of a
soporific quality that will induce swift and painless repose.  This
school advises The Wealth of Nations, Rome under the Caesars, The
Statesman's Year Book, certain novels of Henry James, and The Letters
of Queen Victoria (in three volumes).  It is plausibly contended that
books of this kind cannot be read (late at night) for more than a few
minutes at a time, and that they afford useful scraps of information.

Another branch of opinion recommends for bedtime reading short stories,
volumes of pithy anecdote, swift and sparkling stuff that may keep one
awake for a space, yet will advantage all the sweeter slumber in the
end.  Even ghost stories and harrowing matter are maintained seasonable
by these pundits.  This class of reading comprises O. Henry, Bret
Harte, Leonard Merrick, Ambrose Bierce, W. W. Jacobs, Daudet, de
Maupassant, and possibly even On a Slow Train Through Arkansaw, that
grievous classic of the railway bookstalls whereof its author, Mr.
Thomas W. Jackson, has said "It will sell forever, and a thousand years
afterward." To this might be added another of Mr. Jackson's onslaughts
on the human intelligence, I'm From Texas, You Can't Steer Me, whereof
is said (by the author) "It is like a hard-boiled egg, you can't beat
it." There are other of Mr. Jackson's books, whose titles escape
memory, whereof he has said "They are a dynamite for sorrow." Nothing
used to annoy Mifflin more than to have someone come in and ask for
copies of these works.  His brother-in-law, Andrew McGill, the writer,
once gave him for Christmas (just to annoy him) a copy of On a Slow
Train Through Arkansaw sumptuously bound and gilded in what is known to
the trade as "dove-coloured ooze." Roger retorted by sending Andrew
(for his next birthday) two volumes of Brann the Iconoclast bound in
what Robert Cortes Holliday calls "embossed toadskin."  But that is
apart from the story.

To the consideration of what to put on Miss Titania's bookshelf Roger
devoted the delighted hours of the morning.  Several times Helen called
him to come down and attend to the shop, but he was sitting on the
floor, unaware of numbed shins, poring over the volumes he had carted
upstairs for a final culling.  "It will be a great privilege," he said
to himself, "to have a young mind to experiment with.  Now my wife,
delightful creature though she is, was--well, distinctly mature when I
had the good fortune to meet her; I have never been able properly to
supervise her mental processes.  But this Chapman girl will come to us
wholly unlettered.  Her father said she had been to a fashionable
school:  that surely is a guarantee that the delicate tendrils of her
mind have never begun to sprout.  I will test her (without her knowing
it) by the books I put here for her.  By noting which of them she
responds to, I will know how to proceed.  It might be worth while to
shut up the shop one day a week in order to give her some brief talks
on literature.  Delightful!  Let me see, a little series of talks on
the development of the English novel, beginning with Tom Jones--hum,
that would hardly do!  Well, I have always longed to be a teacher, this
looks like a chance to begin.  We might invite some of the neighbours
to send in their children once a week, and start a little school.
Causeries du lundi, in fact!  Who knows I may yet be the Sainte Beuve
of Brooklyn."

Across his mind flashed a vision of newspaper clippings--"This
remarkable student of letters, who hides his brilliant parts under the
unassuming existence of a second-hand bookseller, is now recognized as
the----"

"Roger!" called Mrs. Mifflin from downstairs:  "Front! someone wants to
know if you keep back numbers of Foamy Stories."

After he had thrown out the intruder, Roger returned to his meditation.
"This selection," he mused, "is of course only tentative.  It is to act
as a preliminary test, to see what sort of thing interests her.  First
of all, her name naturally suggests Shakespeare and the Elizabethans.
It's a remarkable name, Titania Chapman: there must be great virtue in
prunes!  Let's begin with a volume of Christopher Marlowe.  Then Keats,
I guess:  every young person ought to shiver over St. Agnes' Eve on a
bright cold winter evening.  Over Bemerton's, certainly, because it's a
bookshop story.  Eugene Field's Tribune Primer to try out her sense of
humour.  And Archy, by all means, for the same reason.  I'll go down
and get the Archy scrapbook."

It should be explained that Roger was a keen admirer of Don Marquis,
the humourist of the New York Evening Sun.  Mr. Marquis once lived in
Brooklyn, and the bookseller was never tired of saying that he was the
most eminent author who had graced the borough since the days of Walt
Whitman.  Archy, the imaginary cockroach whom Mr. Marquis uses as a
vehicle for so much excellent fun, was a constant delight to Roger, and
he had kept a scrapbook of all Archy's clippings.  This bulky tome he
now brought out from the grotto by his desk where his particular
treasures were kept.  He ran his eye over it, and Mrs. Mifflin heard
him utter shrill screams of laughter.

"What on earth is it?" she asked.

"Only Archy," he said, and began to read aloud--

     down in a wine vault underneath the city
       two old men were sitting they were drinking booze
     torn were their garments hair and beards were gritty
       one had an overcoat but hardly any shoes

     overhead the street cars through the streets were running
       filled with happy people going home to christmas
     in the adirondacks the hunters all were gunning
       big ships were sailing down by the isthmus

     in came a little tot for to kiss her granny
       such a little totty she could scarcely tottle
     saying kiss me grandpa kiss your little nanny
       but the old man beaned her with a whisky bottle.

     outside the snowflakes began for to flutter
       far at sea the ships were sailing with the seamen
     not another word did angel nanny utter
       her grandsire chuckled and pledged the whisky demon

     up spake the second man he was worn and weary
       tears washed his face which otherwise was pasty
     she loved her parents who commuted on the erie
       brother im afraid you struck a trifle hasty

     she came to see you all her pretty duds on
       bringing christmas posies from her mothers garden
     riding in the tunnel underneath the hudson
       brother was it rum caused your heart to harden----

"What on earth is there funny in that?" said Mrs. Mifflin.  "Poor
little lamb, I think it was terrible."

"There's more of it," cried Roger, and opened his mouth to continue.

"No more, thank you," said Helen.  "There ought to be a fine for using
the meter of Love in the Valley that way.  I'm going out to market so
if the bell rings you'll have to answer it."

Roger added the Archy scrapbook to Miss Titania's shelf, and went on
browsing over the volumes he had collected.

"The Nigger of the Narcissus," he said to himself, "for even if she
doesn't read the story perhaps she'll read the preface, which not
marble nor the monuments of princes will outlive.  Dickens' Christmas
Stories to introduce her to Mrs. Lirriper, the queen of landladies.
Publishers tell me that Norfolk Street, Strand, is best known for the
famous literary agent that has his office there, but I wonder how many
of them know that that was where Mrs. Lirriper had her immortal
lodgings?  The Notebooks of Samuel Butler, just to give her a little
intellectual jazz.  The Wrong Box, because it's the best farce in the
language.  Travels with a Donkey, to show her what good writing is
like.  The Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse to give her a sense of pity
for human woes--wait a minute, though:  that's a pretty broad book for
young ladies.  I guess we'll put it aside and see what else there is.
Some of Mr. Mosher's catalogues:  fine! they'll show her the true
spirit of what one book-lover calls biblio-bliss.  Walking-Stick
Papers--yes, there are still good essayists running around.  A bound
file of The Publishers' Weekly to give her a smack of trade matters.
Jo's Boys in case she needs a little relaxation.  The Lays of Ancient
Rome and Austin Dobson to show her some good poetry.  I wonder if they
give them The Lays to read in school nowadays?  I have a horrible fear
they are brought up on the battle of Salamis and the brutal redcoats of
'76.  And now we'll be exceptionally subtle: we'll stick in a Robert
Chambers to see if she falls for it."

He viewed the shelf with pride.  "Not bad," he said to himself.  "I'll
just add this Leonard Merrick, Whispers about Women, to amuse her.  I
bet that title will start her guessing.  Helen will say I ought to have
included the Bible, but I'll omit it on purpose, just to see whether
the girl misses it."

With typical male curiosity he pulled out the bureau drawers to see
what disposition his wife had made of them, and was pleased to find a
little muslin bag of lavender dispersing a quiet fragrance in each.
"Very nice," he remarked.  "Very nice indeed!  About the only thing
missing is an ashtray.  If Miss Titania is as modern as some of them,
that'll be the first thing she'll call for.  And maybe a copy of Ezra
Pound's poems.  I do hope she's not what Helen calls a bolshevixen."


There was nothing bolshevik about a glittering limousine that drew up
at the corner of Gissing and Swinburne streets early that afternoon.  A
chauffeur in green livery opened the door, lifted out a suitcase of
beautiful brown leather, and gave a respectful hand to the vision that
emerged from depths of lilac-coloured upholstery.

"Where do you want me to carry the bag, miss?"

"This is the bitter parting," replied Miss Titania.  "I don't want you
to know my address, Edwards.  Some of my mad friends might worm it out
of you, and I don't want them coming down and bothering me.  I am going
to be very busy with literature.  I'll walk the rest of the way."

Edwards saluted with a grin--he worshipped the original young
heiress--and returned to his wheel.

"There's one thing I want you to do for me," said Titania.  "Call up my
father and tell him I'm on the job."

"Yes, miss," said Edwards, who would have run the limousine into a
government motor truck if she had ordered it.

Miss Chapman's small gloved hand descended into an interesting purse
that was cuffed to her wrist with a bright little chain.  She drew out
a nickel--it was characteristic of her that it was a very bright and
engaging looking nickel--and handed it gravely to her charioteer.
Equally gravely he saluted, and the car, after moving through certain
dignified arcs, swam swiftly away down Thackeray Boulevard.

Titania, after making sure that Edwards was out of sight, turned up
Gissing Street with a fluent pace and an observant eye.  A small boy
cried, "Carry your bag, lady?" and she was about to agree, but then
remembered that she was now engaged at ten dollars a week and waved him
away.  Our readers would feel a justifiable grudge if we did not
attempt a description of the young lady, and we will employ the few
blocks of her course along Gissing Street for this purpose.

Walking behind her, the observer, by the time she had reached Clemens
Place, would have seen that she was faultlessly tailored in genial
tweeds; that her small brown boots were sheltered by spats of that pale
tan complexion exhibited by Pullman porters on the Pennsylvania
Railroad; that her person was both slender and vigorous; that her
shoulders were carrying a sumptuous fur of the colour described by the
trade as nutria, or possibly opal smoke.  The word chinchilla would
have occurred irresistibly to this observer from behind; he might also,
if he were the father of a family, have had a fleeting vision of many
autographed stubs in a check book.  The general impression that he
would have retained, had he turned aside at Clemens Place, would be
"expensive, but worth the expense."

It is more likely, however, that the student of phenomena would have
continued along Gissing Street to the next corner, being that of
Hazlitt Street.  Taking advantage of opportunity, he would overtake the
lady on the pavement, with a secret, sidelong glance.  If he were wise,
he would pass her on the right side where her tilted bonnet permitted a
wider angle of vision.  He would catch a glimpse of cheek and chin
belonging to the category known (and rightly) as adorable; hair that
held sunlight through the dullest day; even a small platinum wrist
watch that might pardonably be excused, in its exhilarating career, for
beating a trifle fast.  Among the greyish furs he would note a bunch of
such violets as never bloom in the crude springtime, but reserve
themselves for November and the plate glass windows of Fifth Avenue.

It is probable that whatever the errand of this spectator he would have
continued along Gissing Street a few paces farther.  Then, with
calculated innocence, he would have halted halfway up the block that
leads to the Wordsworth Avenue "L," and looked backward with carefully
simulated irresolution, as though considering some forgotten matter.
With apparently unseeing eyes he would have scanned the bright
pedestrian, and caught the full impact of her rich blue gaze.  He would
have seen a small resolute face rather vivacious in effect, yet with a
quaint pathos of youth and eagerness.  He would have noted the cheeks
lit with excitement and rapid movement in the bracing air.  He would
certainly have noted the delicate contrast of the fur of the wild
nutria with the soft V of her bare throat.  Then, to his surprise, he
would have seen this attractive person stop, examine her surroundings,
and run down some steps into a rather dingy-looking second-hand
bookshop.  He would have gone about his affairs with a new and
surprised conviction that the Almighty had the borough of Brooklyn
under His especial care.

Roger, who had conceived a notion of some rather peevish foundling of
the Ritz-Carlton lobbies and Central Park riding academies, was
agreeably amazed by the sweet simplicity of the young lady.

"Is this Mr. Mifflin?" she said, as he advanced all agog from his smoky
corner.

"Miss Chapman?" he replied, taking her bag.  "Helen!" he called.  "Miss
Titania is here."

She looked about the sombre alcoves of the shop.  "I do think it's
adorable of you to take me in," she said.  "Dad has told me so much
about you.  He says I'm impossible.  I suppose this is the literature
he talks about.  I want to know all about it."

"And here's Bock!" she cried.  "Dad says he's the greatest dog in the
world, named after Botticelli or somebody.  I've brought him a present.
It's in my bag.  Nice old Bocky!"

Bock, who was unaccustomed to spats, was examining them after his own
fashion.

"Well, my dear," said Mrs. Mifflin.  "We are delighted to see you.  I
hope you'll be happy with us, but I rather doubt it.  Mr. Mifflin is a
hard man to get along with."

"Oh, I'm sure of it!" cried Titania.  "I mean, I'm sure I shall be
happy!  You mustn't believe a word of what Dad says about me.  I'm
crazy about books.  I don't see how you can bear to sell them.  I
brought these violets for you, Mrs. Mifflin."

"How perfectly sweet of you," said Helen, captivated already.  "Come
along, we'll put them right in water.  I'll show you your room."

Roger heard them moving about overhead.  It suddenly occurred to him
that the shop was rather a dingy place for a young girl.  "I wish I had
thought to get in a cash register," he mused.  "She'll think I'm
terribly unbusiness-like."

"Now," said Mrs. Mifflin, as she and Titania came downstairs again,
"I'm making some pastry, so I'm going to turn you over to your
employer.  He can show you round the shop and tell you where all the
books are."

"Before we begin," said Titania, "just let me give Bock his present."
She showed a large package of tissue paper and, unwinding innumerable
layers, finally disclosed a stalwart bone.  "I was lunching at
Sherry's, and I made the head waiter give me this.  He was awfully
amused."

"Come along into the kitchen and give it to him," said Helen.  "He'll
be your friend for life."

"What an adorable kennel!" cried Titania, when she saw the remodelled
packing-case that served Bock as a retreat.  The bookseller's ingenious
carpentry had built it into the similitude of a Carnegie library, with
the sign READING-ROOM over the door; and he had painted imitation
book-shelves along the interior.

"You'll get used to Mr. Mifflin after a while," said Helen amusedly.
"He spent all one winter getting that kennel fixed to his liking.  You
might have thought he was going to live in it instead of Bock.  All the
titles that he painted in there are books that have dogs in them, and a
lot of them he made up."

Titania insisted on getting down to peer inside.  Bock was much
flattered at this attention from the new planet that had swum into his
kennel.

"Gracious!" she said, "here's 'The Rubaiyat of Omar Canine.' I do think
that's clever!"

"Oh, there are a lot more," said Helen.  "The works of Bonar Law, and
Bohn's 'Classics,' and 'Catechisms on Dogma' and goodness knows what.
If Roger paid half as much attention to business as he does to jokes of
that sort, we'd be rich.  Now, you run along and have a look at the
shop."

Titania found the bookseller at his desk.  "Here I am, Mr. Mifflin,"
she said.  "See, I brought a nice sharp pencil along with me to make
out sales slips.  I've been practicing sticking it in my hair.  I can
do it quite nicely now.  I hope you have some of those big red books
with all the carbon paper in them and everything.  I've been watching
the girls up at Lord and Taylor's make them out, and I think they're
fascinating.  And you must teach me to run the elevator.  I'm awfully
keen about elevators."

"Bless me," said Roger, "You'll find this very different from Lord and
Taylor's!  We haven't any elevators, or any sales slips, or even a cash
register.  We don't wait on customers unless they ask us to.  They come
in and browse round, and if they find anything they want they come back
here to my desk and ask about it.  The price is marked in every book in
red pencil.  The cash-box is here on this shelf.  This is the key
hanging on this little hook.  I enter each sale in this ledger.  When
you sell a book you must write it down here, and the price paid for it."

"But suppose it's charged?" said Titania.

"No charge accounts.  Everything is cash.  If someone comes in to sell
books, you must refer him to me.  You mustn't be surprised to see
people drop in here and spend several hours reading.  Lots of them look
on this as a kind of club.  I hope you don't mind the smell of tobacco,
for almost all the men that come here smoke in the shop.  You see, I
put ash trays around for them."

"I love tobacco smell," said Titania.  "Daddy's library at home smells
something like this, but not quite so strong.  And I want to see the
worms, bookworms you know.  Daddy said you had lots of them."

"You'll see them, all right," said Roger, chuckling.  "They come in and
out.  To-morrow I'll show you how my stock is arranged.  It'll take you
quite a while to get familiar with it.  Until then I just want you to
poke around and see what there is, until you know the shelves so well
you could put your hand on any given book in the dark.  That's a game
my wife and I used to play.  We would turn off all the lights at night,
and I would call out the title of a book and see how near she could
come to finding it.  Then I would take a turn.  When we came more than
six inches away from it we would have to pay a forfeit.  It's great
fun."

"What larks we'll have," cried Titania.  "I do think this is a cunning
place!"

"This is the bulletin board, where I put up notices about books that
interest me.  Here's a card I've just been writing."

Roger drew from his pocket a square of cardboard and affixed it to the
board with a thumbtack.  Titania read:


          THE BOOK THAT SHOULD HAVE PREVENTED THE WAR


Now that the fighting is over is a good time to read Thomas Hardy's The
Dynasts.  I don't want to sell it, because it is one of the greatest
treasures I own.  But if any one will guarantee to read all three
volumes, and let them sink into his mind, I'm willing to lend them.

If enough thoughtful Germans had read The Dynasts before July, 1914,
there would have been no war.

If every delegate to the Peace Conference could be made to read it
before the sessions begin, there will be no more wars.

                               R.  MIFFLIN.


"Dear me," said Titania, "Is it so good as all that?  Perhaps I'd
better read it."

"It is so good that if I knew any way of doing so I'd insist on Mr.
Wilson reading it on his voyage to France.  I wish I could get it onto
his ship.  My, what a book!  It makes one positively ill with pity and
terror.  Sometimes I wake up at night and look out of the window and
imagine I hear Hardy laughing.  I get him a little mixed up with the
Deity, I fear.  But he's a bit too hard for you to tackle."

Titania was puzzled, and said nothing.  But her busy mind made a note
of its own:  Hardy, hard to read, makes one ill, try it.

"What did you think of the books I put in your room?" said Roger.  He
had vowed to wait until she made some comment unsolicited, but he could
not restrain himself.

"In my room?" she said.  "Why, I'm sorry, I never noticed them!"



Chapter IV

The Disappearing Volume


"Well, my dear," said Roger after supper that evening, "I think perhaps
we had better introduce Miss Titania to our custom of reading aloud."

"Perhaps it would bore her?" said Helen.  "You know it isn't everybody
that likes being read to."

"Oh, I should love it!" exclaimed Titania.  "I don't think anybody ever
read to me, that is not since I was a child."

"Suppose we leave you to look after the shop," said Helen to Roger, in
a teasing mood, "and I'll take Titania out to the movies.  I think
Tarzan is still running."

Whatever private impulses Miss Chapman may have felt, she saw by the
bookseller's downcast face that a visit to Tarzan would break his
heart, and she was prompt to disclaim any taste for the screen classic.

"Dear me," she said; "Tarzan--that's all that nature stuff by John
Burroughs; isn't it?  Oh, Mrs. Mifflin, I think it would be very
tedious.  Let's have Mr. Mifflin read to us.  I'll get down my knitting
bag."

"You mustn't mind being interrupted," said Helen.  "When anybody rings
the bell Roger has to run out and tend the shop."

"You must let me do it," said Titania.  "I want to earn my wages, you
know."

"All right," said Mrs. Mifflin; "Roger, you settle Miss Chapman in the
den and give her something to look at while we do the dishes."

But Roger was all on fire to begin the reading.  "Why don't we postpone
the dishes," he said, "just to celebrate?"

"Let me help," insisted Titania.  "I should think washing up would be
great fun."

"No, no, not on your first evening," said Helen.  "Mr. Mifflin and I
will finish them in a jiffy."

So Roger poked up the coal fire in the den, disposed the chairs, and
gave Titania a copy of Sartor Resartus to look at.  He then vanished
into the kitchen with his wife, whence Titania heard the cheerful clank
of crockery in a dishpan and the splashing of hot water.  "The best
thing about washing up," she heard Roger say, "is that it makes one's
hands so clean, a novel sensation for a second-hand bookseller."

She gave Sartor Resartus what is graphically described as a "once
over," and then seeing the morning Times lying on the table, picked it
up, as she had not read it.  Her eye fell upon the column headed


                         LOST AND FOUND
                    Fifty cents an agate line


and as she had recently lost a little pearl brooch, she ran hastily
through it.  She chuckled a little over

LOST--Hotel Imperial lavatory, set of teeth.  Call or communicate
Steel, 134 East 43 St. Reward, no questions asked.

Then she saw this:


LOST--Copy of Thomas Carlyle's "Oliver Cromwell," between Gissing
Street, Brooklyn, and the Octagon Hotel.  If found before midnight,
Tuesday, Dec. 3, return to assistant chef, Octagon Hotel.


"Why" she exclaimed, "Gissing Street--that's here!  And what a funny
kind of book for an assistant chef to read.  No wonder their lunches
have been so bad lately!"

When Roger and Helen rejoined her in the den a few minutes later she
showed the bookseller the advertisement.  He was very much excited.

"That's a funny thing," he said.  "There's something queer about that
book.  Did I tell you about it?  Last Tuesday--I know it was then
because it was the evening young Gilbert was here--a man with a beard
came in asking for it, and it wasn't on the shelf.  Then the next
night, Wednesday, I was up very late writing, and fell asleep at my
desk.  I must have left the front door ajar, because I was waked up by
the draught, and when I went to close the door I saw the book sticking
out a little beyond the others, in its usual place.  And last night,
when the Corn Cobs were here, I went out to look up a quotation in it,
and it was gone again."

"Perhaps the assistant chef stole it?" said Titania.

"But if so, why the deuce would he advertise having done so?" asked
Roger.

"Well, if he did steal it," said Helen, "I wish him joy of it.  I tried
to read it once, you talked so much about it, and I found it dreadfully
dull."

"If he did steal it," cried the bookseller, "I'm perfectly delighted.
It shows that my contention is right:  people DO really care for good
books.  If an assistant chef is so fond of good books that he has to
steal them, the world is safe for democracy.  Usually the only books
any one wants to steal are sheer piffle, like Making Life Worth While
by Douglas Fairbanks or Mother Shipton's Book of Oracles.  I don't mind
a man stealing books if he steals good ones!"

"You see the remarkable principles that govern this business," said
Helen to Titania.  They sat down by the fire and took up their knitting
while the bookseller ran out to see if the volume had by any chance
returned to his shelves.

"Is it there?" said Helen, when he came back.

"No," said Roger, and picked up the advertisement again.  "I wonder why
he wants it returned before midnight on Tuesday?"

"So he can read it in bed, I guess," said Helen.  "Perhaps he suffers
from insomnia."

"It's a darn shame he lost it before he had a chance to read it.  I'd
like to have known what he thought of it.  I've got a great mind to go
up and call on him."

"Charge it off to profit and loss and forget about it," said Helen.
"How about that reading aloud?"

Roger ran his eye along his private shelves, and pulled down a
well-worn volume.

"Now that Thanksgiving is past," he said, "my mind always turns to
Christmas, and Christmas means Charles Dickens.  My dear, would it bore
you if we had a go at the old Christmas Stories?"

Mrs. Mifflin held up her hands in mock dismay.  "He reads them to me
every year at this time," she said to Titania.  "Still, they're worth
it.  I know good old Mrs. Lirriper better than I do most of my friends."

"What is it, the Christmas Carol?" said Titania.  "We had to read that
in school."

"No," said Roger; "the other stories, infinitely better.  Everybody
gets the Carol dinned into them until they're weary of it, but no one
nowadays seems to read the others.  I tell you, Christmas wouldn't be
Christmas to me if I didn't read these tales over again every year.
How homesick they make one for the good old days of real inns and real
beefsteak and real ale drawn in pewter.  My dears, sometimes when I am
reading Dickens I get a vision of rare sirloin with floury boiled
potatoes and plenty of horse-radish, set on a shining cloth not far
from a blaze of English coal----"

"He's an incorrigible visionary," said Mrs. Mifflin.  "To hear him talk
you might think no one had had a square meal since Dickens died.  You
might think that all landladies died with Mrs. Lirriper."

"Very ungrateful of him," said Titania.  "I'm sure I couldn't ask for
better potatoes, or a nicer hostess, than I've found in Brooklyn."

"Well, well," said Roger.  "You are right, of course.  And yet
something went out of the world when Victorian England vanished,
something that will never come again.  Take the stagecoach drivers, for
instance.  What a racy, human type they were!  And what have we now to
compare with them?  Subway guards?  Taxicab drivers?  I have hung
around many an all-night lunchroom to hear the chauffeurs talk.  But
they are too much on the move, you can't get the picture of them the
way Dickens could of his types.  You can't catch that sort of thing in
a snapshot, you know:  you have to have a time exposure.  I'll grant
you, though, that lunchroom food is mighty good.  The best place to eat
is always a counter where the chauffeurs congregate.  They get awfully
hungry, you see, driving round in the cold, and when they want food
they want it hot and tasty.  There's a little hash-alley called
Frank's, up on Broadway near 77th, where I guess the ham and eggs and
French fried is as good as any Mr. Pickwick ever ate."

"I must get Edwards to take me there," said Titania.  "Edwards is our
chauffeur.  I've been to the Ansonia for tea, that's near there."

"Better keep away," said Helen.  "When Roger comes home from those
places he smells so strong of onions it brings tears to my eyes."

"We've just been talking about an assistant chef," said Roger; "that
suggests that I read you Somebody's Luggage, which is all about a head
waiter.  I have often wished I could get a job as a waiter or a bus
boy, just to learn if there really are any such head waiters nowadays.
You know there are all sorts of jobs I'd like to have, just to fructify
my knowledge of human nature and find out whether life is really as
good as literature.  I'd love to be a waiter, a barber, a
floorwalker----"

"Roger, my dear," said Helen, "why don't you get on with the reading?"

Roger knocked out his pipe, turned Bock out of his chair, and sat down
with infinite relish to read the memorable character sketch of
Christopher, the head waiter, which is dear to every lover of taverns.
"The writer of these humble lines being a Waiter," he began.  The
knitting needles flashed with diligence, and the dog by the fender
stretched himself out in the luxuriant vacancy of mind only known to
dogs surrounded by a happy group of their friends.  And Roger, enjoying
himself enormously, and particularly pleased by the chuckles of his
audience, was approaching the ever-delightful items of the coffee-room
bill which is to be found about ten pages on in the first chapter--how
sad it is that hotel bills are not so rendered in these times--when the
bell in the shop clanged.  Picking up his pipe and matchbox, and
grumbling "It's always the way," he hurried out of the room.

He was agreeably surprised to find that his caller was the young
advertising man, Aubrey Gilbert.

"Hullo!" he said.  "I've been saving something for you.  It's a
quotation from Joseph Conrad about advertising."

"Good enough," said Aubrey.  "And I've got something for you.  You were
so nice to me the other evening I took the liberty of bringing you
round some tobacco.  Here's a tin of Blue-Eyed Mixture, it's my
favourite.  I hope you'll like it."

"Bully for you.  Perhaps I ought to let you off the Conrad quotation
since you're so kind."

"Not a bit.  I suppose it's a knock.  Shoot!"  The bookseller led the
way back to his desk, where he rummaged among the litter and finally
found a scrap of paper on which he had written:


Being myself animated by feelings of affection toward my fellowmen, I
am saddened by the modern system of advertising.  Whatever evidence it
offers of enterprise, ingenuity, impudence, and resource in certain
individuals, it proves to my mind the wide prevalence of that form of
mental degradation which is called gullibility.
                                             JOSEPH CONRAD.


"What do you think of that?" said Roger.  "You'll find that in the
story called The Anarchist."

"I think less than nothing of it," said Aubrey.  "As your friend Don
Marquis observed the other evening, an idea isn't always to be blamed
for the people who believe in it.  Mr. Conrad has been reading some
quack ads, that's all.  Because there are fake ads, that doesn't
condemn the principle of Publicity.  But look here, what I really came
round to see you for is to show you this.  It was in the Times this
morning."

He pulled out of his pocket a clipping of the LOST insertion to which
Roger's attention had already been drawn.

"Yes, I've just seen it," said Roger.  "I missed the book from my
shelves, and I believe someone must have stolen it."

"Well, now, I want to tell you something," said Aubrey.  "To-night I
had dinner at the Octagon with Mr. Chapman."  "Is that so?" said Roger.
"You know his daughter's here now."

"So he told me.  It's rather interesting how it all works out.  You
see, after you told me the other day that Miss Chapman was coming to
work for you, that gave me an idea.  I knew her father would be
specially interested in Brooklyn, on that account, and it suggested to
me an idea for a window-display campaign here in Brooklyn for the
Daintybits Products.  You know we handle all his sales promotion
campaigns.  Of course I didn't let on that I knew about his daughter
coming over here, but he told me about it himself in the course of our
talk.  Well, here's what I'm getting at.  We had dinner in the
Czecho-Slovak Grill, up on the fourteenth floor, and going up in the
elevator I saw a man in a chef's uniform carrying a book.  I looked
over his shoulder to see what it was.  I thought of course it would be
a cook-book.  It was a copy of Oliver Cromwell."

"So he found it again, eh?  I must go and have a talk with that chap.
If he's a Carlyle fan I'd like to know him."

"Wait a minute.  I had seen the LOST ad in the paper this morning,
because I always look over that column.  Often it gives me ideas for
advertising stunts.  If you keep an eye on the things people are
anxious to get back, you know what they really prize, and if you know
what they prize you can get a line on what goods ought to be advertised
more extensively.  This was the first time I had ever noticed a LOST ad
for a book, so I thought to myself "the book business is coming up."
Well, when I saw the chef with the book in his hand, I said to him
jokingly, "I see you found it again." He was a foreign-looking fellow,
with a big beard, which is unusual for a chef, because I suppose it's
likely to get in the soup.  He looked at me as though I'd run a carving
knife into him, almost scared me the way he looked.  "Yes, yes," he
said, and shoved the book out of sight under his arm.  He seemed half
angry and half frightened, so I thought maybe he had no right to be
riding in the passenger elevator and was scared someone would report
him to the manager.  Just as we were getting to the fourteenth floor I
said to him in a whisper, "It's all right, old chap, I'm not going to
report you." I give you my word he looked more scared than before.  He
went quite white.  I got off at the fourteenth, and he followed me out.
I thought he was going to speak to me, but Mr. Chapman was there in the
lobby, and he didn't have a chance.  But I noticed that he watched me
into the grill room as though I was his last chance of salvation."

"I guess the poor devil was scared you'd report him to the police for
stealing the book," said Roger.  "Never mind, let him have it."

"Did he steal it?"

"I haven't a notion.  But somebody did, because it disappeared from
here."

"Well, now, wait a minute.  Here's the queer part of it.  I didn't
think anything more about it, except that it was a funny coincidence my
seeing him after having noticed that ad in the paper.  I had a long
talk with Mr. Chapman, and we discussed some plans for a prune and
Saratoga chip campaign, and I showed him some suggested copy I had
prepared.  Then he told me about his daughter, and I let on that I knew
you.  I left the Octagon about eight o'clock, and I thought I'd run
over here on the subway just to show you the LOST notice and give you
this tobacco.  And when I got off the subway at Atlantic Avenue, who
should I see but friend chef again.  He got off the same train I did.
He had on civilian clothes then, of course, and when he was out of his
white uniform and pancake hat I recognized him right off.  Who do you
suppose it was?"

"Can't imagine," said Roger, highly interested by this time.

"Why, the professor-looking guy who came in to ask for the book the
first night I was here."

"Humph!  Well, he must be keen about Carlyle, because he was horribly
disappointed that evening when he asked for the book and I couldn't
find it.  I remember how he insisted that I MUST have it, and I hunted
all through the History shelves to make sure it hadn't got misplaced.
He said that some friend of his had seen it here, and he had come right
round to buy it.  I told him he could certainly get a copy at the
Public Library, and he said that wouldn't do at all."

"Well, I think he's nuts," said Aubrey, "because I'm damn sure he
followed me down the street after I left the subway.  I stopped in at
the drug store on the corner to get some matches, and when I came out,
there he was underneath the lamp-post."

"If it was a modern author, instead of Carlyle," said Roger, "I'd say
it was some publicity stunt pulled off by the publishers.  You know
they go to all manner of queer dodges to get an author's name in print.
But Carlyle's copyrights expired long ago, so I don't see the game."

"I guess he's picketing your place to try and steal the formula for
eggs Samuel Butler," said Aubrey, and they both laughed.

"You'd better come in and meet my wife and Miss Chapman," said Roger.
The young man made some feeble demur, but it was obvious to the
bookseller that he was vastly elated at the idea of making Miss
Chapman's acquaintance.

"Here's a friend of mine," said Roger, ushering Aubrey into the little
room where Helen and Titania were still sitting by the fire.  "Mrs.
Mifflin, Mr. Aubrey Gilbert, Miss Chapman, Mr. Gilbert."

Aubrey was vaguely aware of the rows of books, of the shining coals, of
the buxom hostess and the friendly terrier; but with the intense focus
of an intelligent young male mind these were all merely appurtenances
to the congenial spectacle of the employee.  How quickly a young man's
senses assemble and assimilate the data that are really relevant!
Without seeming even to look in that direction he had performed the
most amazing feat of lightning calculation known to the human
faculties.  He had added up all the young ladies of his acquaintance,
and found the sum total less than the girl before him.  He had
subtracted the new phenomenon from the universe as he knew it,
including the solar system and the advertising business, and found the
remainder a minus quantity.  He had multiplied the contents of his
intellect by a factor he had no reason to assume "constant," and was
startled at what teachers call (I believe) the "product."  And he had
divided what was in the left-hand armchair into his own career, and
found no room for a quotient.  All of which transpired in the length of
time necessary for Roger to push forward another chair.

With the politeness desirable in a well-bred youth, Aubrey's first
instinct was to make himself square with the hostess.  Resolutely he
occluded blue eyes, silk shirtwaist, and admirable chin from his mental
vision.

"It's awfully good of you to let me come in," he said to Mrs. Mifflin.
"I was here the other evening and Mr. Mifflin insisted on my staying to
supper with him."

"I'm very glad to see you," said Helen.  "Roger told me about you.  I
hope he didn't poison you with any of his outlandish dishes.  Wait till
he tries you with brandied peaches a la Harold Bell Wright."

Aubrey uttered some genial reassurance, still making the supreme
sacrifice of keeping his eyes away from where (he felt) they belonged.

"Mr. Gilbert has just had a queer experience," said Roger.  "Tell them
about it."

In the most reckless way, Aubrey permitted himself to be impaled upon a
direct and interested flash of blue lightning.  "I was having dinner
with your father at the Octagon."

The high tension voltage of that bright blue current felt like ohm
sweet ohm, but Aubrey dared not risk too much of it at once.  Fearing
to blow out a fuse, he turned in panic to Mrs. Mifflin.  "You see," he
explained, "I write a good deal of Mr. Chapman's advertising for him.
We had an appointment to discuss some business matters.  We're planning
a big barrage on prunes."

"Dad works much too hard, don't you think?" said Titania.

Aubrey welcomed this as a pleasant avenue of discussion leading into
the parkland of Miss Chapman's family affairs; but Roger insisted on
his telling the story of the chef and the copy of Cromwell.

"And he followed you here?" exclaimed Titania.  "What fun!  I had no
idea the book business was so exciting."

"Better lock the door to-night, Roger," said Mrs. Mifflin, "or he may
walk off with a set of the Encyclopaedia Britannica."

"Why, my dear," said Roger, "I think this is grand news.  Here's a man,
in a humble walk of life, so keen about good books that he even pickets
a bookstore on the chance of swiping some.  It's the most encouraging
thing I've ever heard of.  I must write to the Publishers' Weekly about
it."

"Well," said Aubrey, "you mustn't let me interrupt your little party."

"You're not interrupting," said Roger.  "We were only reading aloud.
Do you know Dickens' Christmas Stories?"

"I'm afraid I don't."

"Suppose we go on reading, shall we?"

"Please do."

"Yes, do go on," said Titania.  "Mr. Mifflin was just reading about a
most adorable head waiter in a London chop house."

Aubrey begged permission to light his pipe, and Roger picked up the
book.  "But before we read the items of the coffee-room bill," he said,
"I think it only right that we should have a little refreshment.  This
passage should never be read without something to accompany it.  My
dear, what do you say to a glass of sherry all round?"

"It is sad to have to confess it," said Mrs. Mifflin to Titania, "Mr.
Mifflin can never read Dickens without having something to drink.  I
think the sale of Dickens will fall off terribly when prohibition comes
in."

"I once took the trouble to compile a list of the amount of liquor
drunk in Dickens' works," said Roger, "and I assure you the total was
astounding:  7,000 hogsheads, I believe it was.  Calculations of that
sort are great fun.  I have always intended to write a little essay on
the rainstorms in the stories of Robert Louis Stevenson.  You see R. L.
S. was a Scot, and well acquainted with wet weather.  Excuse me a
moment, I'll just run down cellar and get up a bottle."

Roger left the room, and they heard his steps passing down into the
cellar.  Bock, after the manner of dogs, followed him.  The smells of
cellars are a rare treat to dogs, especially ancient Brooklyn cellars
which have a cachet all their own.  The cellar of the Haunted Bookshop
was, to Bock, a fascinating place, illuminated by a warm glow from the
furnace, and piled high with split packing-cases which Roger used as
kindling.  From below